*Note: The Hebrew word Qabalah or Kabbalah, which roughly means "received (wisdom)," has many alternative spellings. It has become an accepted practice to make these spelling differences meaningful by letting Kabbalah refer to the system of strictly Jewish mysticism with its Hebrew texts, letting Cabala refer to the school of interpretation by Christian mystics and letting Qabalah refer to the Hebrew tradition plus the complex extrapolations of Western Hermeticism. The actual spelling is Qoph Beth Lamed He or QBLH. For more on this subject see: Xiao Gua: Introduction to Scales; and also Dimensions: Correlative Thought and Ban Xiang.

Key
(*** If you have this text in electronic form, such as .pdf or .doc, use these keys with your "Find" command to avoid scrolling)

111 011 ***
GUA 09 09.X *** 09.0
09.M, Key Words 09.G, From the Glossary 09.T
09.6, Top 9
09.6x
Zhi Gua 05 Fan Yao 05.6
09, Dimensions 09, Notes 09, Wai Guang 09, Quotations

The Gua or Hexagram Written Sideways. If you enter this you do not need a lookup key. Note the space in the middle. 1st line is left, top line is right; 1 = Yang, 7 or 9; 0 = Yin, 6 or 8 This example is Wind over Heaven The Hexagram, Gua, Diagram or Chapter Number Da Xiang or Overall Image, Part of Wings 3 & 4 Not the oldest of the texts, but the best introduction The Tuan or Judgment, The Original Zhouyi Statements Assorted meanings and general Gua themes Find: 09.M *** The Gua name, taken from the Glossary The Glossary has additional information on the Characters Tuan Zhuan or Commentary on the Judgment, Wings 1 & 2 This commentary is sometimes (but not always) relevant Yao Ci or Changing Line Text. The Original Zhouyi Line Statements Xiao Xiang or Little Images, Comments on the Yao Ci Part of Wings 3 & 4 This commentary is sometimes (but not always) relevant The Changed Gua or Resultant Hexagram The resonant line in the Zhi Gua. This is not part of the Yi's response, but it may hold clues to the Changing Line's meaning Several of the key Wing and Han structural dimensions See Dimensions. Find: 09, D *** Footnotes to the asterisks (*) in the Simple Translation Outside Illustrations or External Examples Correspondences from three other systems, See Dimensions Illustrations from world literature to illustrate some aspects and other implications of the Gua themes

56

GUA 01, QIAN2, CREATING
Binary 111 111 = 63; Qian below, Qian above; Chong Gua
01.X, Overall Image Heaven moves inexhaustibly The noble young one, accordingly,
is naturally energetic, without rest
Heaven and heaven only, in motion as always, and at least twice as great as anyone thought to think. And forever is only half spent, so things could go twice this far. Life's little part in forever is heaven evolving to learn of itself, a great work indeed, and a lifetime of great work wants a lasting supply of power, with strength to create and not merely endure. We things and selves are too finite and humble to have this. To team up with the power that drives the stars is to feed on nature's momentum, to move with nature's inertia and thus to act in accord with the time. True sorcery uses this source, but the power even to know this requires both patience and sense.
01.0, Creating The greatest fulfillment rewards persistence
Many would make this out to be some magical formula. It begins our sacred text, and so it cannot be simple. First-rate satisfaction is not a thing to wish or pray for. This is not so mysterious: life's most rewarding moments express higher powers: they follow sustained hard work, come along with persistence and repay dedication. Power is the tempo of change, power does work, and work is even its measure. A dragon is what dragon does, not just what he wishes and dreams he could be. And much is given to dragons, including the power to fail in spectacular ways. At the source, where a self is simply a short lived nexus of forces and choices, where causes get knotted up for a while, the earth's humble network of entities, including its highest gods, are no more than little children, reaching out to know. Life seems driven in just one direction, out of and over itself, and into the untried. The highest offering, the greatest sacrifice, might be to give back some of these lives to make a better world, to make it sublime, as the sun lifts the water into the clouds. The purpose or plan to all this is life's art, and even divine force learns as it grows.
57

01.M, Key Words Higher purpose, self-actualizing drives, autonomy, calling, vocation, star quality Sovereignty, command, self-mastery, dragonhood, genius, authority, cogency Diligence, drive, lasting energy, enduring vigor, persistence or duration in time Higher orders, design, innovation; co-authoring with the infinite, dynamic life Positing, originality, initiative; sublimation, sunlight transforming water to vapor Perspective from outside of humanity, attunement to higher rhythms & purposes
01.G, From the Glossary Qian2 (to be) creative, vigorous, energetic, potent, dynamic, constant, enduring, lasting; dry, clean; exhausted; heavenly; (a, the) creation, initiative, authority, sovereignty, design, cogency, autonomy, command, energy, diligence, persistence, endurance, mastery, genius, higher order, higher purpose, calling, vocation, enduring activity, lasting vigor, dynamic living, dragonhood; heaven; warmth of the sun; vigorous appearance; (a, the) male, gang or yang principle; (to) create, initiate, design, author, master, persist, endure (s, ed, ing); creation's, creativity's; gan, (to be) dry, dried
01.T, Tuan Zhuan How great (is) creation's source!
The myriad beings (are) provided beginnings Along with all of the sky Clouds pass, rain falls The varieties of beings flow into form Great light completes (then) begins The six positions (are) by season fulfilled Seasons to mount the six dragons (And) with these to master the skies Creation's way (is) emergence (and) transformation Each being true to inner nature (and) higher law Security (is) joining in the highest attunement It is this that rewards persistence (As) leaders emerge from the numberless beings The myriad realms come together in peace
58

01.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.1: secured by metal brake, weak swine struggles)
Lurking dragon - not at all useful
01.1x - Lurking dragon - not at all useful: The light remains below. As beings from four dimensions and more, the young dragon knows things that young humans do not. Patience and restraint, for example, while feeble as forces, are mighty as powers, since to act at the wrong time is just as defective as acting in wrong directions. What luck that there is so much to do before learning to fly, so much to consider and contemplate still. Ages pass as dragon seed, ages more as an egg, with no more to show than two meter's height and a couple of cracks in the shell. But one does not challenge a sky so full of stars on little pink wings. This is not indecision. What to do is implicit and latent. It is still the wrong place and wrong time. To try not to be the wrong dragon is enough of an effort for now. Who would want to be this dragon or even put him to use gets to use power to wait.
01.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.2: fellowship only inside the clan, embarrassing)
Dragon appears in the field Rewarding to encounter a mature human being*
01.2x - Dragon appears in the field: Merit's reach (is) extensive When you want to grow into adulthood, it is good to live and learn among peers. When you want to grow to potential, it is wiser to seek out those more advanced. How many of these you can find will measure that potential, in degrees of humility. With so much to learn, so much to not reinvent, and so much to unlearn only later, all held as treasure by culture, the young dragon searches the fields of his choice, adding horizons, models and new points of view, becoming exposed and familiar, allotting much of that long span of years simply to learning all of the basics: of fluid and aerodynamics, of eclectic method, of the words and deeds of ancestral dragons, what they have done, and failed to do, having the sky for a limit. Most knowledge will be second hand, for even the purest of selves is made of what others can offer.
59

01.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao 10.3: one eyed see, lame take steps, and get bitten)
A noble young one,* throughout the day, creating, creating By nightfall looking frightful A struggle Not an error
01.3x Throughout the day, creating, creating: Turning (and) returning (is) the way The young dragon ends yet another full day with long hours under the night lights, poring over the tomes and glyphs, deciphering cryptic runes, hunting for something greater than himself, getting to know the big limitations, feeling less than immortal, learning the star routes by heart, forward and back, while his visions of how far there is yet to go deepen much faster than progress he makes. The air and the aura around this noble young one begins to crackle with essence and power. The young dragon teases the web of the scheme of all things, testing the intricate fabric of space time, in search of the greater ripples and warps, in search of optimum points of departure. Persevering was so very easy in theory, but much work has come before great work. There will be a test, where a valiant attempt at an ignorant flight might be fatal.
01.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.4: be true, the bleeding stops, anxiety leaves)
Somehow to dance across the deep* With no mistakes
01.4x Somehow to dance across the deep: To make progress is not a mistake The shaman drinks his brew, spreads his feathers, steps to the edge of the known, to dance into higher realms. The brave young dragon stands at the edge of the cliff, facing this rite of passage one way, his white-knuckled talons scarring the rocks, preparing to leap from aerial theory to practice, now two different things at long last. To gain the abyss will mean to let go of that clawhold completely. The wind will be no easy thing to take hold of, until reaching dangerous speeds. But here is the only control to be gained, the wind becomes the master: the only conquest comes from obeying the facts. No wavering will lift this beast, much less beast and his baggage, so lightening up should help. And never miss half the point by failing to look down. There can be no half measures here, in fact, as there are no real dragons in theory.
60

01.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.5: truths like commerce; with dignity, promising)
Dragon in flight across the sky Rewarding to encounter a mature human being
01.5x Dragon in flight across the sky: The mature human being creates Heads turn as one to the sky, as the hopes of the masses below are carried up high by potential fully expressed. A wide recognition inspires the young ones to follow, if example were the point of it all. Yes indeed, from above they all look like bugs, and like bugs they may think this sky has been conquered. But above and beyond all of this is only the wind in your ears, screaming, then singing, then silent. Beyond gravity, in the cold and crystalline sky, we have met the darkness between the lights, the deep night no dragons will conquer, the humility only the great ones can grasp. What do you really command from up here? Only your own, a view, an attitude, whatever you need to accept all the rest. And little else, but that can be so much. Lesson and example are one: high up is halfway home. Triumph is in the landing.
01.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 43: Decisiveness
(Fan Yao 43.6: no cry for help, the outcome will be misfortune)
Arrogant dragon will have regrets
01.6x Arrogant dragon will have regrets: Excessiveness is not suited to longevity He is proud to be a dragon and he has every right to be so. He takes life beyond. Selfishness, pride and ambition, maligned though they may be, are not flaws or sins. Doing them badly is wrong, or stupid at least, and from this they get a bad name. And when pride starts to worship the self, that which is other more readily kills. Turning success into failure is just not fitness. Superior beings have further to fall. The dark, vast night has two moral lessons for us: to think about how large we are, and to love what we can while we can. The eons of a dragon's span are not eternity. The little hops between the stars are not infinities. The earth, even in hand, is only a lucky, wet rock, among many. A master of existence knows nothing of Nothing. Life's true home is humility: it does not belong in this sky until it can laugh at itself.
61

01.7, Using 9 Observe a group of dragons - without a leader Promising
01.7x Using Nines: Heaven's nature is not about playing the leader Playing, adopting and following leaders are games played first by young children, and by the time they are grown, they play them so badly they injure themselves. Because it is their way, it must be the way the universe runs. The mightiest force in existence must be just like human kings. The small and feeble, too-human mind has things all backwards again. The story is not about them, or who created what, or who put all of the galaxies there, to light our way so poorly at night. One who spends time above has seen bigger pictures than this. In the grand scheme of things, and only a short time from now, humankind will be gone, whether to bones and dust or into better descendants. Breaking open the mind, who wants to live for what lasts will look beyond what the short sight will see. Creation is that which survives us.
01, Notes * 01.2: Da ren is usually translated "the great man," and this is an appropriate translation in the context of Confucianism. But ren is gender neutral: and fu is the word used for "gentleman," when not used as a pronoun. Also the English word "great" is too broad, admitting those who have not earned or deserved their wealth and power. The Zhou Yi authors may have had Zhou Gong in mind when using this term. * 01.3: Jun Zi is usually translated "the superior man," which also carries many anachronistic Confucian implications. A key to the older idea here is the great amount of humble and humbling work to be done on one's merit, and value or worth as a living being, thus the affectionate diminutive zi, indicating room to grow. To the extent that the Yi may be considered a training manual for young leaders, the authors may have had the young Cheng Wang, Zhou Gong's nephew, in mind. * 01.4: From King Lear, Act 4, Scene 1, Gloucester There is a cliff, whose high and bending head Looks fearfully in the confined deep: Bring me but to the very brim of it, And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear With something rich about me: from that place I shall no leading need.
62

01, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 02, Kun, Accepting qian gua (inverse): 01, Qian, Creating jiao gua (reverse): 01. Qian, Creating (chong gua 7) hu gua (nuclear): 01, Qian, Creating zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 28, 44, 43, 01 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 4th Moon (May) 01, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Chokmah in Yetzirah * Tarot: Two of Swords * Astrology: Uranus in Air 01, Quotations * A man must be Solomon before his magic ring will work. --Hafiz * Character is destiny. --Novalis * Because Allah has no other hands than yours. --Sufi proverb * Much can be done to change the nature of man himself. --Julian Huxley * But man, proud man, dressed in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he is most assured, His glassy essence, like an angry ape, Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven, As to make the angels weep. --Shakespeare, Measure for Measure * Eritis sicut Deus, scientes bonum et malum. --Gen.3:5 * An epoch will come when people disclaim kinship with us as we disclaim kinship with monkeys. --Kahlil Gibran * The secret to creativity is knowing how to hide your sources. --Albert Einstein
63

GUA 02, KUN1, ACCEPTING
Binary 000 000 = 00 & 64; Kun below, Kun above; Chong Gua
02.X, Overall Image The earth's capacity is acceptance The noble young one, with tolerance of character, Upholds the outer world
Earth is here and there, and now and then, vast and timeless. Heaven might be larger, but earth is alive; subject to every least thing, but the root and birth of all sentience. Why is a passiveness power? An event needs room to occur. Emptiness is capacity, and capacity is power. The way power can go is the way power does go, that is its way and its capacity. Begin with what is given and everything fit enough follows. All the parts of the whole are in play. Any denial of things as they are is bad science, not a basis for change. To have it all is accepting it all, at the least as a place to begin. What good are blessings not well received? What good is grace without gratitude?
02.0, Accepting Supreme fulfillment Rewarding the mare's persistence The noble young one has somewhere to go To lead is confusion To follow is to learn mastery Worthwhile west to south:* find companions East to north:* forgo companions Secure the certain good fortune*
The fertile mare wanders the breadth of her world, with stamina and endurance, noble bearing and dignity, and yet without thought. She needs no genius to figure her aims, no pride to prance and no shame to limp. She simply inherits the ways of her kind and all the sense that's needed to browse. So many tracks may be traced through one field that the number of possible paths has no end. When one looks at choosing a path, what is real exceeds what is possible. To choose, then, begs how, and life, which grew up with earth, has slowly absorbed some good, simple rules: The path of least resistance is often the path of optimum gain. Securing the certain good fortune will squander less effort in adding up losses. To follow one's senses is to use something older than mountains. To be still and learn is not to be stupid. Then why does leading lead to confusion? Where is guidance first and best sought? Leading is best when more is known and being responsive would make less sense. But simply learn first and all the rest follows. Acceptance keeps all of the options. To not assert such a small thing as self is to move among some far greater powers.
64

02.M, Key Words Receiving, tolerance, gentleness, patience, openness, accommodation, gratitude Assent, contentment, comprehension, understanding, embrace, room, allowance Endurance, perseverance, acquiescence, compliance, groundedness, support, care Potential, capacity, raw material, substance, suchness, realism, consent, upholding Simplicity, naturalness, surety; latitude, range, breadth, largesse, fields of options Power of possibility, first accept givens; absorbing, learning, growing, accessing
02.G, From the Glossary kun1 (to) receive, accept, support, absorb, substantiate, realize (s, ed, ing); (a, the) receiving, acceptance, compliance, substance, matter, material, field (of options), potential, basis, support, ground, capacity, earth; (to be) subordinate, humble(r), passive, accepting, compliant; the earth; (a, the) female, rou, or yin principle
02.T, Tuan Zhuan How consummate (is) receptivity's source!
The myriad beings (are) provided with life And so, (in) acceptance, inherit the sky Accepting (with) generosity upholds the outer world Character accommodates without drawing boundaries Comprehending vastness, exemplifying wholeness The varieties of beings (are) joined in fulfillment The mare (is) the earth's kindred spirit (And) wanders an earth with no borders Gentleness (and) acceptance reward persistence: The noble young one's purpose in going To initiate confusion (is) to stray from the way To follow (with) acceptance (is) to learn the principles West (to) south, find companions: And so, with the help of one's kind, make progress East (to) north, forgo companions: Although, in the end, there will be rewards Securing the certain holds promise: The response to a world without limits
65

02.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.1: not far to return, nothing worthy of regret)
Walking on frost, hardened ice results
02.1x Walking on frost, hardening to ice: The shadow begins to manifest * Gradually fulfilling its nature To realize solid ice Grounds for change gather in knowable ways, are sensed before they are evident, felt before they are obvious. Heralds and portents, traces and signs may be subtle, but unlike expectations, they are legible here in this moment. Winter solstice marks the end of Sol's decline, but a lagging cold has only begun. A shadow's beginning to form is not bad, unless you do not see it coming - for then all progress just goes the wrong way. Without a thought about seasons, the mare gets a new winter coat. The green beings take their first hints and so withdraw to their roots for the winter. The creatures all know what they need to know, without any big brains or science, they follow the order of things, and dress for the occasion. The eggs and the seeds are as smart as they need to be with their own basic grasp of the nature of things.
02.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.2: at the heart of the militia, thrice commissioned)
Straight, square and complete Without repetition, nothing cannot be turned to advantage
02.2x Six second's movement: Straight (is) the way to square * Without repetition, nothing cannot be turned to advantage: The earthly principle (is) illustrated The dimensions of capacity unfold in a natural order. Count the points that fit onto a line, the lines that fit into a square, the planes that fit into a solid, the solids that fit into one span of time. Open the next dimension and options grow instantly endless. Unfold four or more and there is the way. You can take an entire life and still fail to cross one small field in all possible ways. And the ingrates complain about having so little. If life is too short, make it wider, if too thin, go deeper, if amazed, rise up, If this is not enough, live again, or be someone else. The being goes where it goes, conditioned from behind, not by what is ahead, reaching, broadening, deepening and enduring. A beginner's mind keeps all of its options,* free from Been There and free from Done That, the two human thoughts that suck the life from the world.
66

02.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity
(Fan Yao 15.3: diligent modesty, will have closure, promising)
Restraint in display is suited to persistence But for someone engaged in the royal service No achievement brings closure
02.3x Restraining display (is) suited to persistence: For the sake of timely development * Someone engaged in the royal service Knows (and) honors the whole A work will not be a great work if the whole of its point is its author's biography. Higher purpose will serve a cause before self, and the great work of transformation is higher purpose made real. This is not to denigrate self, or to say that great causes are more important or sovereign than beings: it is beings who think and feel, beings who bleed for their causes. No practical fiction like nation or group mind does this. Why does the master work for the work's success, and spread the credit around? Why does the royal servant serve the cause and not the effect? It is not that the work is its own reward, or that some greater good may be served here: the result is simply life's journey through life and by success is the way life advances. This effort needs no distractions. It is better corrected than praised, and praised to better the work.
02.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
Fan Yao 16.4: at springs of readiness, gather companions in
Tied up in a bag No blame, no praise
02.4x Tied up in a bag, no blame: Discretion avoids trouble Drawing the string, not attention, the result for now is in and secured, with no label. Only oneself is a hard thing to be. To be either fetus or pregnant with the possible are not the sustainable states: one wants to burst out and be more than potential, one wants to be kinetic. Even a lifeless earth would want its stones to roll down hills, would want its waters to rush down to the sea. So how much more for a living earth! Yet there are times to be only potential, to learn the things that you have in the bag, to learn and not push the envelope's limits, to just be no big thing, to be set aside, out of the way, to not to be seen by adventure or have no need to prove freedoms. The troubles will soon be compelling enough that this is a thing to not worry about. To incubate, gestate, claim time or space for one's own, also serves a great work.
67

02.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
Fan Yao 08.5: exemplary, three sided hunt, without coercion
Golden dress Most promising
02.5x Golden dress (is) most promising: Refinement dwells within The sovereign's favorite robe is made from dull and bland yellow linen, is simple, comfortably cut, without all the trappings, tassels and frills. Simplicity too can attract and hold things together. Beauty is also a way of seeing, and not just some thing to be seen. The wiser sovereigns remember things others forget: nobility is an ethic to practice, not just a position to hold. Respect can be given and not merely sought. Dignity is held in example, diplomacy in an open hand. A king can know that he is a servant, in place by the grace of the ancestors and for the sake of those yet to come. A full head of hair can serve for a crown, a rump as a comfortable throne, borne around the kingdom by two loyal feet. Court can be held in the heart. Respect can be had in better ways, so that helpers can walk upright. To be humble is not to be less.
02.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.6: the ripest fruit not eaten, nobility gains ground)
Dragons at war in the wild They bleed indigo and golden
02.6x Dragons at war in the wild: Their way (is) exhausted Accepting can accept some wild ideas. Humanity thought up some notion that reality comes in two halves, becoming, in the process, earth's one exception to wholeness. Softness is hardened and strength is made weak. And now both sides are bleeding. The dualist picks and goads his champion, wages the war in his mind, with wild and poetic visions of eternal battles between darkness and light, so ready to hand himself over as some sort of coveted prize. In wholeness the forces also compete, moving the beings ahead, and all the sides win - including the ones passing out of existence. But taking sides you can't have it all. Partial itself means less and unwholesome. This is not a power struggle: power does not struggle. It is force exhausting itself. This would be sad enough if it didn't spill out of the mind and mess up the world.
68

02.7, Using 6 Worth enduring persistence
02.7x Using six (with) enduring persistence: For the sake of greater conclusions Humans beings are in such a hurry they call themselves a race. Thinking they have but a short way to go, they set an appropriate pace. Leaving no time to watch the grass grow, they act as though they were parasites, rushing to grow and consume all they can. They would flee to the stars in their ships and their prayers, and leave what they pray to behind them, on the home where it began. Earth can be thought to have a perspective on this. It might be the whole point of life: this would be of the long run and passing the torch along to successors. Naturalness, what is so of itself, that dumb to the sixth power wisdom that all life is heir to, knows a pace that might go the distance: it is life that lives inside of its means, and knows to sustain its place, and finds its goals in the journey itself. Persistence that fails to endure is just failure.
02, Notes * 02.0 To the Northeast and Southwest were the relative centers or capitals of the Shang (Yin) and Zhou dynasties respectively, at the time the mandate changed hands. Southwest was friendlier ground, a more "secure and certain good fortune," or a path of least resistance. The northeast was within the new domain and was therefore a permissible direction, but here it is seen as more challenging than is currently necessary. * 02.0 This line may also be rendered as"peaceful persistence is promising." But finding one's security in what is already guaranteed by being already at hand may be the best way to find a peaceful persistence. This is Ji, or lucky. * 02.2 Paraphrasing Shunryu Suzuki, see "Quotes" at Gua 25.
69

02, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 01, Qian, Creating qian gua (inverse): 02, Kun, Accepting jiao gua (reverse): 02, Kun, Accepting (chong gua 0) hu gua (nuclear): 02, Kun, Accepting zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 02, 23, 24, 27 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 10th Moon (Nov)
02, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Binah in Assiah * Tarot: Three of Pentacles * Astrology: Neptune in Earth
02, Quotations * The breathing of the true human being comes from the heels. -- Zhuangzi * "Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?" "That depends a good deal on where you want to get to," said the cat. "I don't much care where ..." said Alice. "Then it doesn't matter which way you go," said the cat. --Lewis Carroll * Sitting quietly / Doing nothing Spring comes / The grass grows by itself --Zen * Gratitude is not only the greatest of all virtues but the parent of all others. --Cicero * `Tis a gift to be simple, `Tis a gift to be free `Tis a gift to come round to where we ought to be. --"Simple Gifts" * We shall not cease from exploring / And the end of our exploring Will be to arrive where we started / And know the place for the first time. --T.S. Eliot * Paradise is exactly like where you are right now ... only much, much better. --Laurie Anderson
70

GUA 03, ZHUN1 (or TUN2), RALLYING
Binary 100 010 = 34; Zhen below, Kan above
03.X, Overall Image Clouds and thunder Rallying The noble young one, accordingly, sorts warp from weft
This is only a heavy storm, not nature's cruelty or wrath, but to the young sprout, it's an unplanned test of a right to survive in a world suspiciously too full of youth. Just life against chaos, there is nothing personal going on here. First it was stones where he wanted his roots and now this. In the blinding rain, with pressing needs, goals are lost to view, except to keep from coming undone. Impatient frustration just leads to more tangles. He cannot impose his plan with all this defending to do. The young noble locates his feet and stays put, humbly calling on helpers, noting his losses, counting his blessings. The warp is what will persist: this is first to sort.
03.0, Rallying Supreme fulfillment Worthwhile to be persistent Not at all useful to have somewhere to go Worthwhile to enlist delegates
The sky fills with chaos while heaven creates. The desperate young thing is faced with few choices, none by design or deserved. And when it seems to be only you, against all the chaotic world, the trick is to rethink what `you' is, to include the sum of your helpers and all the resources at hand. Collect the wits first and start turning things to advantage. The one who can even use losses will be the one who's set back the least. Even while on the defensive, when you cannot impose the least part of your plan, a humble niche can still be fought for and won, given the right-sized ambition. Then struggle becomes future fitness and loss just the loss of things never needed. The human mind is so skilled at taking advantage from trial and tests that folks can look back in time and declare, with the straightest of faces: All this happened to me for reasons unknown at the time, but this must have been part of some greater plan. But in fact the reason here is only the method of life, stealing just a little more order from chaos, one small life at a time. Coherence, persistence of order, is no great rule directing heaven or all of the powers that be. Keeping order is life's little challenge.
71

03.M, Key Words Struggle, difficult beginning, birth/growth/early/first trials, frustration, confusion Needing assistance, reinforcement, concentration, coherence, pulling (it) together Fallback, triage, retrenchment, regrouping, muster; to minimize loss, hold/bear up Prioritizing, consolidating a position, using reserves; the write off, the rainy day Courtship metaphor for confusion, frustration and turmoil; young sprout as Zhen Frustrated anticipation, the loss of unhatched chickens, the linearity of expectation 03.G, From the Glossary Zhun1 (to) rally, muster, collect (together), store up, bank (up), assemble, accumulate, pull together, bring together, summon (help), congregate, secure; need help, need assistance, struggle, sprout, start (out) small (s, ed, ing); (to be) in difficulty, in need of (help, assistance), sparing, hard, difficult; (a, the) village, congregation, camp, rally, initial difficulty, difficult start, birth pains, early trials, rites of passage; a single blade of grass, bending and twisting; (to consolidate gains while cutting losses); to garrison or station soldiers; also pronounced Tun2. 03.T, Tuan Zhuan Rallying The firm (and) the flexible begin to interact and so (come) the trials of new life Moving through the heart of risk
Much fulfillment (means) persistence Thunder (and) rain's activity abounds to excess
The sky creates in haste (and) obscurity (It is) necessary to enlist delegates, but not (in order) to relax
72

03.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
(Fan Yao 08.1: being true overtops vessel, even more promise)
Cliffs all around Worthwhile to maintain resolve Worthwhile to enlist delegates
03.1x Even with cliffs all around The objective to make progress (is) correct * By respecting the lowly (and) disregarded The great gain humanity Life's road was recently so full of promise, then it showed itself to be a dead end. Echoes are sending mixed signals, the crowded horizon might as well be a maze. Where terrain is not mapped or charted, wrong turns are not a mistake, and yet they still need some fixing. It begins with getting the lay of the land, mapping the options, charting a course: tasks not done while forging ahead with great strides and pushy ideas. You could even stop and ask for directions, or follow the water downstream to get out, or follow your own footsteps back. All suggest that humility saves time and trouble. Maintaining resolve is not always maintaining direction. Sometimes the course is defined, the givens are a `take that.' Whether humbled by choice or making bad choices, if humility leads to success it is not a lesser idea.
03.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
Fan Yao 60.2: not beyond courtyard gate, disappointing
It seems like needing assistance is the same as turning back A team of four horses arrayed alike Not an adversary but a marital suitor* The woman, of tender years, is resolved: no babies Ten years, then babies
03.2x Six second has difficulties Overcoming resolve * Ten years, then babies: Revise the rules He thought that the hard part was over, once he and his horses were ready to go. His team is assembled and his presence majestic. He will sweep her from her feet. So he holds his breath, paces and waits for a sign. And tries not to look like a fool. Just what is he courting here? He keeps a tight hold on those horses, and ponders this a bit longer, and envies the robber who can be more straightforward and also even less welcome. There are affairs best put in order by not beginning them yet, and sides to some situations that call for perceptions broader than those of a fool on love's errands. Does he want strings and tangles to sort? In a state of mind with warp and weft so confused? With implications and complications: the rules are on the run here. Recover ten years in advance: let them go and head back to normal.
73

03.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.3: three years to conquer, lesser people useless)
Pursuing the deer without preparation or forester* All alone, going into the heart of the forest The noble young one is discerning Which is not the same thing as quitting To proceed would be embarrassing
03.3x Pursuing the deer without preparation (or forester): In order to follow the game * The noble young one gives this up To proceed (is) embarrassment (and) futility He was told that delegates could be appointed, but somehow thought this inferior. So, armed with some training in poetry, but ill advised by instinctive knowledge and lacking in second hand wisdom, our hero sets out to tame the wilds in three days, and looks for mistakes he can learn from. So eager is he to bring home a nice prize that he fails to notice the storm. The dark clouds obscure all sense of direction. Rain erases his tracks. All of the things that he needs to know now were learned long ago by his culture, yet tonight he might need to reinvent fire. To scout and to track and to orienteer were mastered ages ago by the deer, who know the turf too, and all of its hazards and tricks. The goal will win, not be won here. Luckily, deer don't eat meat. But if he can learn, this hunt will bring food for thought, for many years to come.
03.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.4: following to have success, persistence has pitfalls)
A team of four horses arrayed alike The quest of a marital suitor To advance is promising Without doubt worthwhile
03.4x To ask and then to proceed (Shows) clarity His horses would not be arrayed and bedecked in their finest if he wanted his aims and agenda kept secret. And yet if he followed only his aims, instead of the signals and signs, there would be no communion today. To succeed means also to follow. His mind has held on long enough, awaiting some sort of good signal. Good sense said not to come with no sign, but he will not wait for two of them just to be sure. This seems to be it: she does not look away, and so forward he goes to his maiden, the bright, happy fool he has waited to be. His mind, with all its reins and restraints, steps down as his ruler. His new leader knows what to do, having practiced more years than the mind can count, nor would it let mind forget. Why did she say yes? What's wrong with her? Ask later. For now, they are both in good, loving hands.
74

03.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.5: honest return, with no regrets)
Collecting one's riches A little persistence is promising A lot of persistence has pitfalls
03.5x Collecting one's riches: The ramifications (are) not yet revealed The rainy day will arrive, but it will always look different somehow from the one which was planned or allowed for. The wherewithal banked or hoarded or saved for such times is not an accessible wealth. True riches are mobile, liquid and spent. The right amount of insurance will not cover every conceivable problem, but asks what needs to be covered and why, or to be discounted and where - what futures are worth less today than tomorrow. The investment goes nowhere, or does little good, while returns will diminish in proportion to fear and exaggeration of risk. Saving up to save oneself can economize on economy using delegates, neighbors and pools. One spare of every possible thing in one's house will tie up half of one's holdings. But one spare of each thing in each hamlet shows a rich understanding of wealth.
03.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.6: none increase, someone assaults: fickle heart)
A team of four horses arrayed alike Tears of blood, flowing like water
03.6x Tears of blood, flowing like water: How could this be continued? The courtship goes terribly wrong: all of his glory proves to be not good enough. He broadcasts the loss of his mind now, each false hope cries out as it dies. This is, of course, the end of the world, tomorrow will not come around any more. Pain is now always, and happiness never. He is now lost - a loser, a failure, selected against and denied. But perhaps he was merely too full of himself, with too much expected, too little attended, and all of this leaking of his is just a way to leak out of an outlet, and what he has is more than he needs, and not less than he needs at all. Why make a little misfortune enormous? Why this much mourning for something now known to have had no real chance? Why make the short road endless? A problem of simple proportion. Things begin great as illusions, but the real begins and ends uninflated.
75

03, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 50, Ding, The Cauldron qian gua (inverse): 04, Meng, Inexperience jiao gua (reverse): 40, Jie, Release hu gua (nuclear): 23, Bo, Decomposing shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
03, Notes * 03.2 Titus Yu, quite literally, has "not outlaws but inlaws." * 03.2 There was a custom I may not be capturing here. A poor groom could help a bride's family save face by feigning the abduction of a bride. I am not certain, but these could be the robbers suggested here. At the least, the practice may have made it easy within the culture to confuse or associate the suitor with the robber. * 03.3 Yu2 has several appropriate translations (all of them intended: preparation, readiness, precaution; foresight, forethought; concern, worry; and forester, game warden, etc) which cannot be rendered by a single English word.
03, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Geburah in Briah * Tarot: Five of Cups * Astrology: Mars in Water
03, Quotations * Character consists in what you do on the third and fourth tries. --James Michener * We will now discuss in a little more detail the Struggle for Existence. --Charles Darwin * Let the end try the man. --Shakespeare, Henry IV * It is in self-limitation that a master first shows himself. --Goethe * Necessity does the work of courage. --George Eliot (Marian Evans) * In the difficult are the friendly forces, the hands that work on us. --Rilke * Great perils have this beauty, that they bring to light the fraternity of strangers. --Victor Hugo * Every man expects somebody or something to help him. And when he finds that he must help himself, he says he lacks liberty and justice. --Edgar Watson Howe * Trials teach us what we are. --Charles Spurgeon * In critical moments even the very powerful have need of the weakest. --Aesop
76

GUA 04, MENG2, INEXPERIENCE
Binary 010 001 = 17; Kan below, Gen above
04.X, Overall Image At the foot of the mountain emerges a spring Inexperience The noble young one, accordingly, proceeds to fruition
by nourishing character
They gurgle and burble and babble at first. In time the small pits and pools will fill, questions are answered and needs are met. The fulfillment of first things comes first, and each new rim is a threshold, and then a moving on, over those mocking depths, under those frowning heights. The spring and the springtime of life is the watershed, the headwaters of a being. It is still too far away to begin to search for great streams, but not too far away to learn how to think of searching. The things that are lacking, the gaps in the understanding, the unmet primary needs, the why's and why not's, are what appetites are for. It's the hunger, not the meal, that moves the youth along.
04.0, Inexperience Fulfillment It is not I who seeks the young and inexperienced The young and inexperienced seek me The first consultation informs The second and third show disrespect Disrespect deserves no information It is worthwhile to be dedicated
It is not the duty or function of oracles to chase a young fool around with advice. Nor is it wisdom to give or seek answers. Wisdom lies in the way one questions, the say one has in the way that one hungers, the taste that one has in one's wants. Pointless, inane and importune questions get no information at all, but not because they irk Teacher. There is just nothing there to receive or contain information, and no way to process the changes. You do not need the answer to question, but this will shape the response with language and context. To learn is to change oneself, from an earlier state to a later. The young one is born with half of what is needed and half of what must be lost. Too much of potential is there in the being at birth, to go to half of anywhere, and do half of any thing, but half of which are danger and trouble. To this end the young one begins his life as a halfwit. The other half is the culture, tempered by family and friends, with two tools: for all there is to be lost there is no, for all to be won there is yes. The child is blessed who has both in good measure. To grow in every direction is no direction at all. Being specific means boundaries.
77

04.M, Key Words Early development, education, guidance; differentiating, specifying, personalizing Inquiry, questioning, questing, discovery; fulfilling potentials, talents, aptitudes Foolishness, folly, ignorance; a childlike hunger to know, untrained green vines To be covered, blinded, immature, obscure, obtuse, uncultivated, inexperienced Making connections and pruning, learning and unlearning, training the mind Educate as to lead out; instruction; importance of questions in framing answers
04.G, From the Glossary meng2 (a, the) inexperience, immaturity, innocence, darkness, obscurity, cover, ignorance, insensibility, foolishness, deception, folly, stupidity, fool, halfwit, (tangled, untrained) green vines; (to) cover, conceal, hide, cheat, dupe, deceive, darken, stun, receive, suffer, undergo (s, ed, ing); (to be) inexperienced, uncultivated, rudimentary, rude, crude; passive, subjected to; entangled, obscure, immature, young, ignorant, foolish, dull, green, blind, in the dark, darkened, enveloped, uninformed, shrouded, unenlightened, unconscious, insensible, foolish; the small of a thing; go with covered eyes
04.T, Tuan Zhuan Inexperience
At the foot of the mountain are hazards (To be) at risk and yet remain still (Shows) inexperience Inexperience (is) fulfilled: According to fulfillment's conduct at the heart of the time It is not I (who) seeks the young (and) inexperienced, The young (and) inexperienced seek me: The objectives (are) complementary The first consultation informs: According to the firmness within The second (and) third (show) disrespect Disrespect deserves no information: Disrespect (shows) immaturity Inexperience (is) the way to cultivate uprightness (This is) a sacred task
78

04.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.1: one's own affairs are rushed, ponder decreasing this)
Delivering the inexperienced It is worthwhile and useful to discipline another If practiced to remove the shackles and cuffs But for this to continue is a disgrace
04.1x Worthwhile (and) useful to discipline another: For the sake of ethical standards The wild and unruly behavior of lively young fools poses a serious question or two: How much is mine to do? And: How much can I get away with? And this deserves a serious answer: about half of what you might do, but not to include that tantrum, or playing under the wagon, or biting your little friend's nose off. There is so much to unlearn, even right at the start. Some of the lessons won't wait : the need for them must be assumed, maybe restraint in the form of restraints. But the object is making these a part of the subject, discipline grows into self-discipline. Somebody's ethical program becomes the child's second nature. All vines need some structure to climb. But culture too can unlearn, when tools for this process, like shame, pain and guilt, fail us all. Consequences can diminish the options and still not diminish the child.
04.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.2: depriving bed of frame, dismissing persistence)
Embracing the inexperienced is promising Involving the women is promising The young one can manage the household
04.2x The young one can manage the household: The firm (and) the flexible interrelate Old master keeps a vigil as a young son is apprenticed to life, learning how to live. Loosed among the other young fools, he learns to share and play, fight and retreat. Loosed among the women he learns to mistrust expectations, and of the family life, with its palette of diverse points of view. Among his daily duties he learns to trade effort for value, and thus to weigh value itself against effort. There can be no better teacher of duty than freedom, or teacher of freedom than duty. He will slowly add real context, training in safe environs as consequence is slowly stepped up. Learning how to learn and why will precede what to learn and when. Education is backwards if the object is to teach someone a subject. The subject will learn when his mind has objectives. The subject best taught is the student himself, and relevance is the bait.
79

04.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.3: correcting father's fixations, a little regret)
Not at all useful to court the woman Who encounters a man with money And loses self-possession Not a direction with merit
04.3x Not at all useful to court (this) woman: (Her) behavior (is) less than responsive A young fool is being given some fatherly advice, a sample of the way things work, but artfully lit and properly timed, and before the hormones take over. Too soon will waste teacher's time, too late could waste the young man's whole life, as well as the whole family fortune. Models of the world and how it should be compete like weeds to root themselves in young and impressionable minds. Some models invade whole cultures, and when they do they begin to look like rules. Someone is always needed to stand outside, look in and share observations. A cultural alpha male might mimic a natural alpha and go to great lengths to buy up the highest priced brides, not with strength and character, but with a symbolic merit. Who has the job then to stand up and say what else this behavior is called? One who does not deserve to be enslaved.
04.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.4: shock to subjugate, three years to big domains)
Afflicted by ignorance A shame
04.4x The affliction (of) ignorance leads to shame: Abandoned (and) far from reality A sure sign of one of two problems: too little guidance is one, too much is the other. In either case, there is now just one solution. The wise ones ought not to spare fools the lessons that follow their folly, as long as the fools do not thereby incur lasting damage or perish, though much can also be said for letting the fools perish young, denying the world their offspring - for the future of the breed, sooner is often better, so cultures that survive a long time have more serious rites of passage. But if, for some silly reason, you happen to think this one is worth saving, the fool being you or your child, for example, it is time to begin a new program, and abandon the one which has failed to work. First hand experience teaches; so too does second hand knowledge. We can learn things in life either way, but we tend to perish first hand.
80

04.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.5: evanescent as sweat, cries; scatter stockpiles)
Youthful inexperience Opportune
04.5x Youthful inexperience holds opportunity: Accepting (is) the way to gain access And then there are fine forms of foolishness. Some will say that it takes two decades for young human beings to grow: enough time for body and brain to mature. Others might claim this could take at least two million more years. One who claims this sort of youth will not be an ignorant fool and the questions will keep on coming forever. Why stop growing? Ignorance can be ten times the work and has no freedom or fun, no healthy laughter or play. It is dying to grab hold of the answers. The young ones, with their long youth, have much to teach the mature. A sage remains ready to learn: answers can't fill up his questions, beliefs can't end his search. He still wants to be everywhere, suspending belief and disbelief both, fingers in all of the pies when not giving lectures on virtue and worth. Why call one who would kill this "mature"?
04.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.6: seasoned noble assumes mandate, lessers not used)
Smiting the halfwit Not worthwhile to practice transgression Worthwhile to defend from transgression
04.6x Worthwhile (and) productive to defend from transgression: Those above (and) those below make peace We will teach him a lesson he will never forget. We will teach him a thing or two. What sort of wise teachings are these? Was he told he'd be beaten? Is this what is due? Have mistakes already hurt more? Most of the higher primates are most of the time at peace. Now and then an alpha will bite or thump on a beta, or twice sometimes on a rival. But where do we draw humanity's line? And where do we go across it? Supposing the point is to give an act negative value, when consequences are otherwise absent, to mimic a fair and just world. Do we give only fair and just pain? Are extreme measures fairly measured? Is the precious freedom to risk and make errors preserved? Discipline is for the disciple, something to choose to adopt, not something to discipline into disciples. A proper response will lead to this choice.
81

04, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 49, Ge, Seasonal Change qian gua (inverse): 03, Zhun, Rallying jiao gua (reverse) : 39, Jian, Impasse hu gua (nuclear) : 24, Fu, Returning shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
04, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Yod; Path between Malkuth and Hod (Trad: Tp-Cd) * Tarot: The Hermit (Inquiry) * Astrology: Sixth House, Mutable Earth, Virgo
04, Quotations * Stay hungry, stay foolish. --motto from The Whole Earth Catalog * It is not the answer that enlightens, but the question. --Eugene Ionesco * In order to digest food, a man needs a stomach. Who troubles himself to inquire, however, whether a would-be wise man is correspondingly well prepared? --Idries Shah, Reflections * What one knows is, in youth, of little moment; they know enough who know how to learn. --Henry Adams * Lessons are not given, they are taken. --Cesare Pavese * A man has no ears for that to which experience has given him no access. --Nietzsche, Ecce Homo. * I was gratified to be able to answer promptly, and I did. I said I did not know. --Mark Twain * A prudent question is one half of wisdom. --Francis Bacon * Good judgment comes from experience, and experience comes from bad judgment. --Barry LePatner
82

GUA 05, XU1, ANTICIPATION
Binary 111 010 = 58; Qian below, Kan above
05.X, Overall Image The clouds rise into the sky Anticipation The noble young one, accordingly,
Takes refreshment and sustenance With peace of mind and cheer
The plump, wet clouds have released nothing yet, obeying celestial rules, but not the demands of beings in thirst below. Desire and purpose belong to life, not the stars. What will be a blessing some day is now a troubled hope. But the time is always perfect for something, not all of life is on hold. What a sage must have or do must first await better timing. And yet the heavens seem to cater to his wants. What might such a one sacrifice for rain? His neediness, perhaps, to wait with a greater strength, working on merit, acceptance and gratitude. Hope is not filling enough. To make the best use of the meanwhile means to use this time, to wait like there's no tomorrow.
05.0, Anticipation Be true Honor fulfillment Persistence is timely Worthwhile to cross the great stream
The real problem here is not how late the rain is: it is how much too early one comes with one's mind and its set of big expectations. It is not heaven's business to cater to the beings. Heaven could starve us to death and not care, and not have a reason to do so. It is up to each of the beings to make what provisions it needs. Of course we will get what we need, as soon as we can look back in time. It is meeting what might be called needs while looking ahead that causes these questions of why, and all of their vacuous answers. Needs are more easily met than wants, much more than wishes and hopes, but none are binding on anything other than life. What must be done might not be. Stars are said to serve wishes, but wise ones wish now for what is at hand, and later for what was to come. And not being busy meeting those needs means they will have a lot of free time, and so can take all of the time that they need. Some think they can kill time while they are waiting. This is just not a sane thought. The best sort of patience is artful and moves towards the best place to wait. There is no better time to cross the great stream than the days near the end of a drought.
83

05.M, Key Words Waiting, awaiting, readying, earliness, suspense, calculated inaction, patience Gratification deferred involuntarily, satisfaction postponed, delays, deprivation Presence of mind, window of opportunity, being properly ready, providing for Nourishment, necessities, essentials, prospects, hunger and thirst, prerequisites Doing without, biding time, working on worthiness, maximizing the meanwhile Making the most of emptiness & want; getting ready, invocation; looking out for
05.G, From the Glossary xu1 (to be) essential, needful, necessary, insufficient, tantalized, suspended; (a, the) anticipation, suspense, expectation, desire, demand, need, duty, obligation, necessity, requirement, prerequisite; (to) wait, await, abide, bide time, postpone, tarry, stop, defer, do without, watch for, look out for, need, require (s, ed, ing); Shuowen has stopped by rain, waiting it out instead of waiting for rain; [deferred gratification]
05.T, Tuan Zhuan Anticipation
(Means) necessity Hazards lie ahead (Be) firm (and) persevering and so avoid complications
This means to avoid affliction (and) exhaustion completely Anticipation
Be true Honoring fulfillment, persistence is timely: (Be) poised, with celestial dignity, (And), accordingly, upright (and) balanced Worthwhile to cross the great stream: To make progress will be an accomplishment
84

05.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.1: well's mud not consumed, old, nothing to take)
Waiting on the outskirts Worthwhile to use what endures No blame
05.1x Waiting on the outskirts: Not rushing into difficult action * Worthwhile to use what endures (and) avoid error: Before losing the principle He waits by the fence at the edge of the farm, far afield and far removed. Nothing is compelling. He does only business as usual. If the thing or noise or strange light off on the far horizon is destined to endure it will need to endure the journey to here. All things come that are real enough, but why not let nature work some of it out first and make this time come to him for a change? There's a good long view out here, it is not as though he can't see this thing coming. There is still time for waiting, the groundwork and ditches await, and a drought is the best time to clean out the well. Working those heavy shovels and hoes strengthens that sword arm too. This will free up some time to come to terms with the present, to get stuff out of the way, and perhaps even clean up that pit of a house, to be prepared for this big visitation.*
05.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.2: matron loses veil, do not pursue, 7 days to gain)
Waiting on the sand The small will talk In the end promising
05.2x Waiting on the sand: Abundance lies in the middle * Even though the small will talk Consider the promising outcome The rains will always come, sometimes in seven days, or sometimes in seven years, so here is a workday's day at the beach, making the most out of little or nothing, laying back by the edge of the stream, idly watching the high clouds drift by, with a faraway look for all the big pictures, in limbo and loving it, pondering the changes and torrents to come, their white waters tearing down rocks, piling up beaches and dunes with infinite patience. And of course distant voices will slander and gossip, with petty little abrasives, a less pleasant babble than water, but no less pleasantly meaningless. The small will live any life but their own, with nothing better to do than you with your nothing at all. So you wait where only the big floods will hit, on an ample margin of error. Studying time is work best done with large samples.
85

05.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
(Fan Yao 60.3: such a lack of restraint, and so, such lament)
Waiting in mud Inviting predators to approach
05.3x Waiting in mud: Misfortune waits beyond * Of our own accord to invite predators: Attention (and) mindfulness avoid ruin The long awaited thing has not shown, but everything else has been dropped in its honor. The meanwhile is as if null and void. Waiting is not going nowhere, just as not doing is not doing nothing. Calculated inaction invites all sorts of exciting and complex events, fast fun, and emergencies too. Too ready to be the first to arrive, waiting where small floods hit first, way down in the lowly depression, too stuck in only what's coming, not sure of footing or basis, foreclosing all other options, one had best heed that sinking feeling. Thieves and predators both like to watch for swine who wait in the mud, too sloppy to flee, such a special treat for the slowest of thieves, such easy bait they will look for traps first. Biding time well is bidding things come. When they do one wants to be well, but here one loses all firmness.
05.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 43: Guai, Decisiveness
Fan Yao 43.4: rump with no skin, inferior progress now, be led
Waiting in blood Get out of the pit
05.4x Waiting in blood: Comply on the way to comprehending Obsessed with the thing not forthcoming, so that nothing else can exist, he limits his view of objectives. Like standing down in a pit of great depth, his horizons might be all watched at once. The suspense is killing him. It is eating him alive. The mind without patience or input will make up things and events on its own, including the scariest monsters, who so love these deep, dark pits, and can hardly wait to be fed. Bloody hell! What a trench to die in! What a hole to defend! Unable to maneuver, or get outside of himself, has himself too well cornered, in a nightmare of a drama. We are trying to coax him out now, you see, but he still thinks that he is a leader. This is such a good hole to give up. Better to hunker down in a tunnel, then move towards the light. What is he waiting for now? Out is simply the way that's not in.
86

05.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.5: Lord Yi's daughter married, the way to happiness)
Waiting at wine and food Persistence is promising
05.5x (At) wine (and) food, persistence (is) promising: Making use of the mean(while) correctly The meanwhile is not that mean after all. In an interval of less stress, a calm center between busier times, a peace between troubles and wars, toasting and feasting and even rebreeding get started. It is not a down time at all. There is no need to wait for old reasons. So the sage arrives half a day early, all agog at the food and spices of life, all that forgotten fun, getting first fingers in all of the pies, making sure that the wine is just right. Where else should sagacity lead now? They say that life is not a rehearsal. This rewards presence, not patience. Tomorrow's meal is just not half as satisfying today. This is not a pause between times, but a climax all on its own, not a calm before some storm, but the center of the weather, and not some stop on the way to one's going. There is simply no good reason to have an inferior time.
05.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.6: rain at last, respect qualities already achieved)
Entering into a pit With no invitations extended to visitors, three people arrive To attend to them will end in good fortune
05.6x With no invitations extended, visitors arrive To attend to them will end in good fortune: Although not a proper situation Still less than a major mishap Waiting properly also waits for the things not expected, and is seldom disappointed. You had all that time on your hands to get ready, even when you knew not what for, but all that you did was long out the window for something that had not yet arrived. Now come what may has. You might think you could have kept house in less pitiful shape, but waiting does not work well in the past, and there is no could have been. What's not done's not done. The question now is how quickly to learn, since now is a meanwhile too, even during the knocks at the door. There is still time to salvage some dignity and get a good attitude ready. This is where the guests will most want their welcome. Of course every host in the sociable world will apologize for their pit. At least you will not have to lie now. Clear a quick trail and receive them as honored.
87

05, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 35, Jin, Expansion qian gua (inverse): 06, Song, Contention jiao gua (reverse): 06, Song, Contention hu gua (nuclear): 38, Kui, Estrangement shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
05, Notes *05.1 There are two oblique references here. The suggestion to clean out the well at the deepest part of a drought, when the water table is lowest, is a Zhi Gua and Fan Yao reference to 48.1. The pit of a house refers to what is coming at 05.6. A poor family might live in a hovel, often called a pit house, dug halfway into the ground and covered over. An ill-kept house referred to as a pit is a also common metaphor in other languages.
05, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Chokmah in Briah * Tarot: Two of Cups * Astrology: Uranus in Water
05, Quotations * An inquisitive professor once visited Nan-In to pay his respects, but he could hardly bring himself to stop talking. Nan-In served him tea, pouring the cup full and not stopping. "It is overfull," cried the professor, "no more will go in!" "Like this cup," said Nan-In, "you are full of your opinions and speculations. I cannot show you Zen unless you first empty your cup." --Muju * And hap'ly Fate's a Theist-word Subject to human chance and change. --The Kasidah * When tomorrow comes, think tomorrow's thoughts. --Arabic proverb * If pleasures are greatest in anticipation, just remember that this is also true of trouble. --Elbert Hubbard * We love to expect, and when expectation is either disappointed or gratified, we want to be again expecting. --Samuel Johnson
88

GUA 06, SONG4, CONTENTION
Binary 010 111 = 23; Kan below, Qian above
06.X, Overall Image The sky together with water is contradiction in movement* Contention The noble young one, accordingly,
In undertaking the work, appraises beginnings
A boat afloat on the water, with stars above for guidance: a permit to go anywhere, if the crew could decide where to go. With broad horizons and too many choices, some might say that one way is as good as another, others might draw a line in the water and take a strong stand on a moveable premise, others will claim that there is a wrong way in all of the choices that sink or maroon you. The stars are impartial but useless. The captain will have a compatible crew and backup plans before going.
06.0, Contention Being true yet opposed Wariness in the middle is promising At the end, unfortunate Worthwhile to meet a mature human being Not worthwhile to cross the great stream
Advocacy, in systems of justice, does not begin with the truth, but by withholding one half of the truth, then exaggerating the other. The hyperbole weakens the case, and a jury and judge weigh double the nonsense, while somebody lies under oath. Yet in legitimate conflicts of interest, both can be right and both wrong. Certainly both can be sure, or an outer half certain, and an inner with no idea. But however sure one may be, what is true may be worlds away. Inquisitors full of assumptions can refute or validate anything, if they can control all the questions. But "true" can be also a verb, a reconsideration of aim in terms of where it wants to go and what it has to begin with. We true our aims and our courses. This will use our sense of resistance and friction to make corrections in courses, adjustments best made at the start of a journey, the midst of great water being a bad place to stop halfway. But rudders won't work without some forward motion, so the true must learn on the move. The right idea is altered enough to accommodate the real: successes are found where resistance and failure are not. Right and truth guarantee no success.
89

06.M, Key Words Advocacy, adversarialism, partiality, partisanship, taking or promoting one side Presumption, challenge, competition; ambivalence, approach-approach conflicts Conflict, disparity, dissent, dissonance, points of view within the bigger picture Resistance, friction, strife, grievance, litigation, dispute, contest, confrontation Arbitration, diplomacy, (re)conciliation, reconsideration, mid-course corrections Revisiting postulates & reference frames, using feedback, finding metasolutions
06, Notes 06.6 The sky seems to rise while water is always falling and river-borne water in old China tended Eastward, the opposite direction of the heavenly bodies.
06.G, From the Glossary song4 (a, the) contention, conflict, challenge, dispute, dissent, litigation, argument, quarrel, contest, antagonism; (to) contend, dispute, challenge, contest, dissent, litigate, accuse, argue, quarrel, reprimand, advocate, speak out publicly, bring (suit, a complaint, a grievance), demand justice, plead before a court (s, ed, ing); (to be) quarrelsome, adversarial
06.T, Tuan Zhuan Contention
Above (is) firmness, below (is) risk At risk and yet tenacious (Means) contention Contention Being true (yet) opposed, Wariness in the middle (is) promising: The firm comes forward and gains the center At the end, unfortunate: Contention is not suited to completion Worthwhile to meet a mature human being: To honor the central and true Not worthwhile to cross the great stream: (This) leads to the abyss
90

06.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao 10.1: simply treading forward, nothing wrong)
Not prolonging certain endeavors The small will talk In the end, promising
06.1x Not prolonging certain endeavors: Contention is not suited to being prolonged * Even though the small will talk One's arguments are clear He has only begun to enact his plan and already gossips are making their noises. Having made a noisy beginning, he resolves to change his mind, plead no contest, withdraw and start over. Now the gossips could get really excited, but half of the conflict has just slipped away. The noise was good information, even if its content was not. Friction and drag are kinds of intelligence. Note that the swiftest boat has also the smallest wake, and the sharpest knife cuts without effort. So where is one wrong in changing one's mind? Trial balloons are meant to get popped; all great artists have lots of erasers; if the water is really cold, it is best if only your big toe tells you so. Sometimes being a quitter is wisdom. Anyone can begin in an error, it requires more of a fool to complete one. What is there now to defend so soon?
06.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua: 12, Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.2: embracing servitude, only common one's promise)
Not capable of contending Capitulate and take refuge One's home town's people, three hundred households, Will escape suffering
06.2x Not capable of contending: Capitulate, take refuge (or) sneak away * From a lowly position to contend with superiors: Suffering comes as a harvest You travel to see the tyrant, bearing a list of your village's grievances and seeking redress and justice. But your audience goes poorly, your lucid explanations, your logical arguments fall upon deaf ears. You are absolutely correct and the tyrant is equally wrong. Inferior people have all of the power today and reason has no voice. And yet you bow, and submit to honorable father, to a spoiled and arrogant fool. You bite your tongue and swallow your pride, you get small and invisible quickly and don't even think about justice today. The truth was only one of the options: to find the others first means surviving. Picking one's battles with care might be done best at the start, but soon after comes a close second. This is not submitting to fate, like a corpse or prisoner would. It's about the best future, not about truth.
91

06.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.3: rump without skin, inferior progress, brutal)
Incorporating long-standing virtues In order to be steadfast Distressing, but in the end, auspicious Yet for someone engaged in the royal service There is no completion
06.3x Incorporating long-standing virtues: Following the superior (is) promising Conflicts can leave one shaken, with certainties in doubt and afraid of going too far. Not all human beings can spend half of life to examine and forge an original ethic. Society offers a fallback in classical virtues and morals, the compromises already packaged and approved by the mediocrats and the lowest of common denominators. Settling early on compromise is not always a good idea, yet it can help you move on to your more fruitful pursuits. An original, self-driven life is hard work. This isn't always worth all of the effort if one can be better used elsewhere. But the problems here are not in the lore of these hand me down values and truths. The safe course is still just one course, but promotes itself, and will go to war, as the one true way. Those who serve kings should not try to lead. Many more should not try to think.
06.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.4: scattering those groups, claim the high ground)
Not capable of contending Returning to take up a higher purpose Withdrawing to secure the certain Promising
06.4x Returning to take up a higher purpose Withdrawing to secure the certain: This is not failure Imagine that our life is a maze with walls only one meter high, and everyone thinks that the rule is to crawl through this on your belly. And the one who stands tall and looks over the walls is a cheat and a quitter. Most life has its multiple levels like this. The fighting goes on in the trenches and the peace is made up above. The problem itself can be changed by changing its frame of reference, by letting in more options from the other parts of the world. Problems are not best solved on the level where they begin; solutions are often just one level up. To liberate mind from the known is not to go floating away from the real, to change the mind is easier than to change the rest of the world, and to change the game itself will break only one set of rules. Conflict dignifies things that need not even be. Higher purpose plays from above.
92

06.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.5: persist despite regrets, noble one has examples)
The contest is most promising
06.5x The contest (is) most promising: Make use of the balance correctly* Being true and sincere but still opposed. Maybe this is the right time for a contest, or conflict, to take a stand and assert what is right, or even simply to demonstrate who is the best. Beware of the warrior who knows that today is a good day to die. But the oddest things sometimes happen with one who is right and true, or is truly the best. They might find themselves outside of themselves in the contest, in some zone with the flow, walking the shining path, occupying the center around which opposing forces compete. It is like they have entered the problem at its moment of resolution, and all of the puzzle's pieces are found and sit right side up. This is not done from way down inside of one's purpose. When opponents are ready to fall they get help, those who are ready to self-destruct are assisted and everyone wins.
06.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.6: oppressed by creepers, have regrets and move on)
If somehow one is awarded the leather belt and ribbons By the end of the morning they will be three times stripped away
06.6x Using contention to be subjected to burdens: Truly not a basis for honor Does this mean that one should renounce competition? Or that all triumph is empty? Or that victory carries no meaning? If this is only a game, then the morning's six contests still have great value. If this is mistaken for what is real and true, there is not only no net achievement, one is also six tests more exhausted. Conflict will take things out of proportion on purpose, but it ends by leaving them where they belong. It is when one thinks this important that even the winners will lose. The winner here is awarded six fine challenges, and honored with partners able to vie for top places. Character builds, to use in retirement later. And while there is no end to the wheel, there are the rewards, and the best may get to be put out to stud. It does not all need to sum down to zero. Simply decide if you want this, or find something better to do.
93

06, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 36, Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured qian gua (inverse): 05, Xu, Anticipation jiao gua (reverse): 05, Xu, Anticipation hu gua (nuclear): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
06, Notes * 06.5x A common interpretation of this line suggests that the subject has jumped from a position as combatant or plaintiff to that of judge, mediator or arbiter. This does not seem to be justified by the Zhouyi text, but rather seems to be extrapolation or inference from the Xiao Xiang combined with Wang Bi's notes. I think that the subject is still a participant in the conflict or contest, but that mastery requires finding the middle way. A few of the images used in the commentary derive from the martial art known as Aikido.
06, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Yesod in Yetzirah * Tarot: Nine of Swords * Astrology: Luna in Air
06, Quotations * One more such victory and we are lost. --Pyrrhus * If there were a verb meaning "to believe falsely", it would not have any significant first person, present indicative. --Wittgenstein * I am bound to furnish my antagonists with arguments, but not with comprehension. --Benjamin Disraeli * But what convinces us is not necessarily true- it is merely convincinga note for asses. --Nietzsche, WTP * Convictions are more dangerous enemies of the truth than lies. --Nietzsche * A man who is doing his true will has the inertia of the universe to assist him. --Crowley, Magick in Theory and Practice * We owe almost all our knowledge not to those who have agreed, but to those who have differed. --Charles Caleb Colton * Pick battles big enough to matter, small enough to win. --Jonathan Kozol * Don't take the wrong side of an argument just because your opponent has taken the right side. --Baltasar Gracian
94

GUA 07, SHI1, THE MILITIA
Binary 010 000 = 16; Kan below, Kun above
07.X, Overall Image Within the earth there is water The militia The noble young one, accordingly,
Is tolerant towards the people And cares for the multitude
A wealth of hidden reserves, like water deep in the ground. The land might seem dry, but the harvest's potential is already here. The people might seem defenseless, but more dangerous arms and armor are cached close at hand, awaiting the rallying cry. A wise leader will nourish his people and help them to train their abilities, holding most of their resources hidden and most of their strength in reserve as able, healthy, good-hearted people. But as they are called upon, a number of forms can be filled on demand: liquidity becomes solidarity. The wrong leader will keep them standing, out in the open, divided and conquered, unaware of problems and tyrants at home.
07.0, The militia* Persistence A mature person's good fortune No blame
Imagine the perfect village, peaceful and prosperous, from a bandit's point of view. To the extent that life is good it may need to be defended, safe in its many scenarios, with resources, means and wherewithal arranged for multiple uses, ready to adapt, with both strength and wealth secured by a healthy diversity. But all of this attention paid to being secure is best if gone when not needed, leaving only a small contingent of vigilant ones to watch the gates and horizons, set to emerge in emergencies only, and not just standing by, rattling swords. To have one of merit on point, one worthy to call upon loyalties, means the difference between militia and mob. There are long standing reasons why there will not be one vote for each man here, why merit leads when life is at stake. Who would be eager to kill, or ready to die for the cause when life itself is the cause? Would that all states were ad hoc like this and sunset all laws when done and go home. This can refer to one person as well, a mature one taken as model, a pool of resources, a population of selves, the readiness of a one's reserves to meet the time's conditions. Persistence means discipline and discipline, maturity.
95

07.M, Key Words Ready reserves, liquidity, solvency, mobile and fungible assets, resourcefulness Interdependence, collective force, strength in numbers, coalition, solidarity, allies Instruction, discipline, training, regimen; planning for contingency, preparedness Hedging, strategic security, expedience; chain of command based on merit or skill Guardians, host; multiple uses of resources, the masses used as reservoir or pool A defensive army disguised as a people, an ad hoc army or a grass-roots militia
07.G, From the Glossary shi1 (a, the) militia, military, reserves, army, armies, host, hosts, legion(s), troops, garrison; general, master, specialist, tutor, expert, leader, instructor, director, sage, assessor, example, (role) model; expertise, organization, preparedness, readiness; [liquidity]; all; the people, the multitude, population; (to) teach, instruct, emulate, imitate, take as a norm or standard; model or pattern after another; militarily; unit of 2500 troops
07.T, Tuan Zhuan The militia
(Means) the multitude Persistence
(Means) uprightness The skill to employ the multitude (with) uprightness
(Is) especially suited to use by the sovereign The firm (is) central and resonant
The practice (is) hazardous, yet responsive To apply this is toxic to all under heaven and yet the people endure behind it (For their) welfare: Given this, where is the error here?
96

07.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.1: united in commitment, persistence is promising)
The militia sets out according to codes To deny good order is unfortunate
07.1x The militia sets out according to codes: To forget the codes (is) unfortunate With a few coded toots on the company's horn, the militia comes running to rally, scythes swapped for swords, robes changed for armor. Fitness and readiness both have been maintained. Each man has his special skill and priorities ready. The tactics and strategies are by now second nature. Logistics all have their numbers, for faster communication. The regimens and protocols keep the rhythm and cadence. This is no free for all: there are orders and chains of command here. Even the martial artists and warriors, while not pawns, are disciples, instructed to function as one with some mythical sort of hive mind. With all this enacted by one simple code, it would not do to let the bugle boy toot his own tune, however rousing and peppy. He has trained to not be himself now. One can only hope that the raiders do not know the music.
07.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.2: straight, square, complete, without repetition)
At the heart of the militia Promising Not a mistake The sovereign three times grants commissions
07.2x At the heart of the militia (is) promise: Upholding heaven's favor * The sovereign three times grants commissions: Embracing the myriad realms The general's tent is pitched in the midst of the hum and he takes the time to listen. His command radiates from the center instead of the top, and what respect that he commands serves him in place of awe. The general is the one who has the broadest of freedoms, the widest knowledge and the fewest restrictions. And this is why he is called the general, instead of the specific. The best have a mystical breadth, the least might lay claim to a heavenly sanction. The general must understand all of the foes. The one who does nothing else but grease the chariots' axles needs someone who connects him with the one who supplies the grease. The specialist will fall in the first general battle if there is no such coordination. Wise leaders will know how soldiers behave, follow the way things unfold and shorten the lines of supply and command.
97

07.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.3: advancing upon an empty town)
A militia likely to transport fatalities Brutal
07.3x A militia likely to transport fatalities: Wholly lacking in merit The militia marches dauntlessly on, but the battle wagons are too full already, with the casualties and corpses. Of course one expects to see soldiers wounded or dead in a war, but they have not met the enemy yet. In estimating their strength they don't calculate well. Yes, they can deal out horror and death, but this was the friendly fire. This is just not passing muster. Perhaps the multitude has taken the leadership over. Perhaps their leaders are so idle-headed that the masses might as well be self-ruled. Maybe they can all take a vote now on where to go next, or maybe form a committee, or decide they all get to ride in the wagons. Foes could stay home and still win a war of attrition, then show up to fix up the farms and care for the widows and daughters. The higher grades of advancement are open now, but this means someone to blame.
07.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.4: release your big toe, trust companions)
The militia's fallback encampment Not a mistake
07.4x A fallback encampment is not a mistake: Still not neglecting the principles This does not look like business as usual. The militia sends out its party of scouts, who come back pale and trembling, all full of stories and chatter. The foes do not look like people, their smiles melt stones at a distance, even their dwarves are two meters tall. The retreat is sounded in whispers. If this were a standing army, with its standing orders and targets, things might be a lot harder, with no getting free from last week's plans and ideas. The militia can disengage and think twice, and be more afraid to look dead than foolish, and win a truly great victory in simply remaining alive. Already there is talk of a great new alliance, but first is more talk of remaining invisible, advancing in other directions, assuming no postures, making no gestures or taunts. At least some more information is needed and room in which to review it.
98

07.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure
(Fan Yao 29.5: pit not flowing over, appreciate level attained)
The hunt takes captives Worthwhile to manage the talking Avoid error The elder son captains the militia The younger son transports fatalities Constancy is inauspicious
07.5x The elder son captains the militia: According to tempered action * The younger son transports fatalities: A commission would not be appropriate The game is afoot and thus the hunt becomes war games. Wild pigs and birds have invaded the field. To put the young son in charge now is to bring on the slaughter, but get, in the process, a three-week supply of leather and bacon or poultry and eggs. The quicker reaction is noisy and hasty. The wiser response will look at the time and big picture. The elder son, as captain, will plan a strategic defense, will manage this invasion as though it were a campaign, and summon the swineherds instead of the butchers and give the militia a herd and a flock, to manage for the next generations. War is often called the Dao of abnormality. It is waged with the unexpected. In the predictable are the pitfalls: one arms with the crafty surprises. The young son knows no such big bag of tricks. The elder has the repertoire, the commanding information.
07.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience
(Fan Yao 04.6: smiting the halfwit, defend from transgressions)
The seasoned noble assumes the mandate, Establishes domains and recognizes ruling families Lesser people will not be used
07.6x The seasoned noble assumes the mandate: By right (of) merit *Lesser people will not be used: (They would) certainly confuse the domain The battles are over and won; the weapons and armor are returned to the cache; the militia is disbanded, debriefed and sent home. The losses are tallied and not found severe and all of the due adjustments made. Reconstruction gets underway, and from the sound of things, the newborns will soon outnumber the graves. The prince takes back his command from the general's most capable hands. But in this time while the wounds are still fresh and bleeding, the prince and the general will talk. The terrible price has been paid, lessons bought dearly with lives and in blood. The two will now squeeze all the growth that they can from this cost. Those of proven valor and skill will be granted power and land. Those who tried to help, but did not, still risked their lives for the cause and are honored with coin and gratitude. Life is still for learning.
99

07, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 13, Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others qian gua (inverse): 08, Bi, Belonging jiao gua (reverse): 08, Bi, Belonging hu gua (nuclear): 24, Fu, Returning shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
07, Notes * 07.0 It would be misleading to translate shi as "The Army," especially with its connotation of "standing army." However, the late 20th century army (militia) of Switzerland, provides a nearly perfect example of the hidden, liquid and mobile reserves described and advocated here. Their knives also have the corkscrews and fingernail files.
07, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Yesod in Assiah * Tarot: Nine of Pentacles * Astrology: Luna in Earth
07, Quotations * A government needs a hundred soldiers for every guerrilla it faces. --Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar * This year will go down in history. For the first time, a civilized nation has full gun registration. Our streets will be safer, our police more efficient, and the world will follow our lead into the future. --Adolf Hitler, 1935 * Among the many misdeeds of the British rule in India, history will look upon the Act depriving a whole nation of arms as the blackest. --Gandhi * Whither depart the souls of the brave that die in battle / Die in the lost, lost fight for the cause that perishes with them. --Arthur Hugh Clough * A king may choose his garments as he will, there is no certain test. But a beggar cannot hide his poverty. --Aleister Crowley, Liber Legis * A strange game, Professor Falkan. The only winning move is not to play. --War Games (movie) * I see many soldiers; could I but see many warriors! "Uniform" one calleth what they wear; may it not be uniform what they therewith hide! --Nietzsche, TSZ#10
100

GUA 08, BI3, BELONGING
Binary 000 010 = 02; Kun below, Kan above
08.X, Overall Image Across the earth there is water Belonging The early sovereigns, accordingly,
established the numerous realms to make kinsmen of all of the leaders
Across the commonest ground, the waters collect, drawn on by the least resistance to gather. The myriad streams pay a tribute to ocean, holder of all the deep regions. To make the water come your way, move to the lowest place. To know where this is just follow the pull, sense the undercurrents, the interconnectedness, the tidal forces. The rivers and rains take the low path to ocean. The high achievements and the lofty ideals become islands. This is far more humble than that. Troubles are fewest when families stand united, related and familiar. Where the family is in fragments, grant it some common ground. One rarely hears of factions, fragments and pieces of water.
08.0, Belonging Promising For a first consultation, supreme and enduring commitment Not a mistake Wanting peace, approach directly The late are the unfortunate ones
Belonging is drawn by attraction; it's not a thing to be pushed. Holding the people together is not a thing that you think of, plan, then jump up and do. It is something you make yourself ready for, or worthy of, or appropriate to. The spontaneous ones arrive first, feeling their way in, finding their place, the preliminaries done in accord with their natures, not in accordance with judgment and logic. Life has had long ages to figure family out. The older parts of a primate's brain are filled with little scripts and devices to hold the band together, the subtlest signals and signs, rewards, alarms, taboos and incentives, or even tricks like love to keep you from eating your children. The family goes way back. If you are in the right place then right things will come. But do not ask the water to climb. Why are you not where you say that you wanted to be? Ask first if you are fit to this place. Is this the right place at all? So what is it holding you back? Reassess yourself and start over. If you find you must belong, it is easier to remake yourself than something larger than you. The late seek effects and not causes, or they have too little in common with what they would belong to.
101

08.M, Key Words Affiliation, association, alliance, confluence, congress, concourse, convergence, Assimilation, coherence, cohesion, concord, commonality; bonding, joining, unity Affinity, accord, mutuality, merging, sharing, union, nearness, welcome, kinship Similarity, relatedness; to be drawn together; group by type and family, compare Identification with; organic leadership, forces of attraction; kind-ness, like-ness Common ground, origin, interest or cause; mitakuye oyasin (all of my relations)
08.G, From the Glossary bi3 (to) accord, belong, combine, go together, join, affiliate, unite, associate (to, with); sort, compare, match, assemble, join, follow, (put, hold) together, draw an analogy (s, ed, ing); (to be) affiliated, paired (with), concordant, well-disposed; close, familiar; successive, comparable, analogous, similar; on behalf of; (a, the) union, belonging, affiliation, association, togetherness, congestion, commonality
08.T, Tuan Zhuan Belonging
(Means) promise Belonging
(Means) confirmation The humble respond (and) follow (For) a first consultation, supreme and enduring commitment
(And) not a mistake: Due to firmness in the center Wanting peace, approach directly: Above (and) below (are) resonant The late are the unfortunate ones: This path runs out
102

08.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
(Fan Yao 03.1: cliffs all around, resolve, establish delegates)
Be true in joining with them Make no mistake: Being true more than fills this plain clay vessel The end will come to hold even more promise
08.1x Joining with them (at) first six Holds even more promise The lowliest and emptiest things will be the first to fill up, but this is not the same as the most abased or the neediest things. A valley will fill first with water, then life. Water does not struggle up hills. It proceeds by feeling its way, not with visions of some distant sea, not by longing for ocean. There are places for struggle, vision and longing, just not here and now. Being true and sincere already exceeds this vessel's capacity. It is ready to fill up, not hungry to consume, and it can hold no more sky. Being not more than yourself, or wanting no more than what you are given, is a solid place to begin. For genuine humility, the beyond and unexpected might almost seem to delight in planning pleasant surprises, but unexpected good fortune comes simply from not expecting. You know when and where you belong, only maybe not why.
08.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure
(Fan Yao 29.2: canyon holds risks, seek modest gains)
Joining with them comes from within Commitment is promising
08.2x Joining with them comes from within: Nothing of one's own (is) given up To join with them feels like the right thing to do. The heart says to go now, and what seems like a resonance echoes. Of course the heart has no sense and no brains, and none have not learned the hard way that belonging the wrong way can injure original nature. The timely question to ask of this joining may be: can you be yourself here? This does not mean all of yourself. Nor does it mean that you could be here forever. It does not mean being supported, or encouraged in all your more private endeavors. Nothing will be guaranteed here. All the affairs of the heart are risks, of pain soon, and later, resentment. But often the pain will be in perfect proportion to what is not asked with modesty. If all that you ask is to not lose the core of yourself, this much is easy to watch. Then, if or when a bond fails to form, you can always move away.
103

08.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
Fan Yao 39.3: if going is impassable, coming is turning around
Joining with such inferior people
08.3x Joining with such inferior people: Is this not sufficiently painful? Belonging is done without effort, like going the watercourse way, and yet the need to belong is a powerful force: just look at any great river, roaring towards the sea. The needs for this are a basic part of the being. Bonds of common blood, or even of simple circumstance, like being born in one kingdom instead of another, will wrap much of human existence up in one package. Then we want anything but the silence or vacuum , anything but the lonely and dark. But must the need to belong outweigh almost everything else? Does unconditional love mean having no standard at all? Does a fear to pass judgment mean life is an exercise in bad judgment? If equality is assumed, is this being equal to everything average and mean? Inferior peers apply pressure. Passive members can join the wrong flow, right down sewers and drains.
08.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.4: a lot of promise, avoid mistakes)
Outwardly joining with them Commitment is promising
08.4x Outwardly belonging among the worthy: In order to follow the superior He joins the outer order, learns the secret handshake and passwords, and dons the costume of custom. He is offered the mysteries one at a time. The king's servant pledges allegiance in words that are not his own, the priest leads a prayer that might not ring true to his doubts. Or a family might be adopted, not blood. The externals are not called trappings for nothing, but sometimes one really wants to be trapped, to be known, to be fooled into feeling secure and spend some time in safe harbor. This might not be an inferior thing, and it's not the same as falseness. Forms do not matter as long as they serve. Any group that has boundaries will be a little parochial, with an us that wants to look down on a them. Just don't renounce the group next door. Keep friends across the great water, and only accept what doctrine you need.
104

08.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.5: golden dress, most promising)
Belonging exemplified: The sovereign employs only three game flushers Letting go of the forward game His district's inhabitants will not be coerced Promising
08.5x Belonging exemplified holds promise: The position (is) correct (and) central * To abandon the unwilling (and) seek the accepting (Is) letting go of the forward game * (His) district's inhabitants will not be coerced: The superior commands the middle The game is surrounded on only three sides. This grants any beast its birthright to freedom who chances to find the way out. Then one hunts the volunteers, the unfit and the unluckier ones. The sovereign has set a noble example here, showing how to rule without fraud, and the only force or compulsion being a force of compelling example. He makes his people aware that they too are free to choose the way out, if only across the great stream. A tyrant might believe that he holds a people with fences and chains, collecting power with coercion, and conscripting a loyal army. Of course it's an ancient question: Pat on the back or a ruling fist? Carrot or stick? Vinegar or honey? Attraction or promotion? So what kind of heaven do you go to under a threat? Grip with the open hand and bind them with ties of their choosing.
08.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.6: observing others' lives, a noble does no harm)
Joining with them without leadership Unfortunate
08.6x Joining with them with no priorities: Without a purpose (or) outcome What sort of odd contradiction is this? Belonging and union work best when they follow like water, feeling their way with the currents, with no big expectation or plan, only living and learning en route. And yet now it is said that belonging and union, without head or leader, no priorities, nor mind up in front, nor purpose or outcome in view, nor knowledge of north, up or east, is the way to misfortune and trouble? It is known to be smart for the leader to follow, for the head to learn, for the mind to track, for a plan to adapt and improvise, for priorities to agree with a natural law. It is known that succeed means also to follow. Spontaneity is not like chaos. The block of uncarved wood still has its natural grain to guide the woodcarver's vision. Anarchy follows the natural order and alphas emerge to lead. Unity has a direction.
105

08, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 14, Da You, Big Domain qian gua (inverse): 07, Shi, The Militia jiao gua (reverse): 07, Shi, The Militia hu gua (nuclear): 23, Bo, Decomposing shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
08, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Binah in Briah * Tarot: Three of Cups * Astrology: Neptune in Water
08, Quotations * But we, to little state and transient God Gave all our souls and let our loved ones bleed ... Again we come out of our lesser loyalties, in tears, To build love's well-earned city in the rich sod. --Warren McCulloch. Embodiments of Mind * But when the sagely man appeared, limping and wheeling about in the exercise of benevolence, pressing along and standing on tiptoe in the doing of righteousness, then men began to be universally perplexed .... Then men began to be separated from one another. --Zhuangzi * Neither the country nor the society we build out of it can be healthy until we stop raiding and running, and learn to be quiet part of the time, and acquire the sense not of ownership but of belonging. --Wallace Stegner * Those whose vision encompasses what they are as well as who they are know the true breadth of life, which is far more important than its length. --Julie Fawley
106

GUA 09, XIAO3 CHU4, RAISING SMALL BEASTS
Binary 111 011 = 59; Qian below, Xun above
09.X, Overall Image The wind travels high in the sky Raising small beasts The noble young one, accordingly,
trains and refines the character
The west wind drives across the sky, invisibly and without effort, yet making vast changes. The vultures climb high on the zephyr, barely seen, watching the land in great detail, for signs of life to erase. The winds of time remove the rough edges, unsharpen stones, twist the great trees, erase the intrusions of self-importance and human significance, all monuments to the small. The gentle breeze has the whole of earth's climate behind it, and all of the time in this world. The sage makes his profile small to the wind, refines his outward nature, attending minutia and detail, polishing surfaces, becoming a part of the unseen forces and part of the friendly persuasion.
09.0, Raising small beasts Fulfillment Thick clouds but no rain From our western horizon
The zephyr, for all of its subtlety, still has the strength to drive the dense clouds from the region, to haul all that heavy water away. Living things too small to see transform a planet from lifeless desert to garden. And the logic of ignorant fools can transform it right back into desert. The power to tame possessed by the small counts time by the eon, no hurry, no matter. What is this season or that to the wind? Culture waits for the crops, crops wait for rain and the rain waits for just the right whim. How much more can less do? On the other side of the world, the butterfly's wing whips up a furious storm. But which butterfly was it? The sage will take care and attend to his smallness, give up self-importance to side with a vaster presence, to side with what endures, and in this way outlives himself and his footprints. This might explain his attention to seed, and why his eyes look beyond. The gods will dwell in the details, but the devils will dwell in there too. So who will take charge? Who will master this breeze? The masters are already up there, doing the most with the least, at one with the wind's wearing forces, watching for signs of life to erase.
107

09.M, Key Words Complexity, complications, attenuation; chaos, complexity, little things adding up Micromanagement, diminishing returns, getting caught up in the details, fussiness Irritants, nuisances, trifles, worries, cares, distractions, the back-breaking straws Attrition, erosion, small demands; wearing forces, shaping, refining & polishing Long-term finitude, insignificance, limited influence, tiny pieces of big puzzles Subtle persuasion, gradual adaptation and cumulative changes, fine adjustments
09.G, From the Glossary xiao3 (to be) average, common, diminished, homogeneous, humble, insignificant, lesser, light, little, low(ly, er, est), mean, mediocre, minor, minute, modest, ordinary, slight, small(er, est), petty, tiny, trifling, trivial, unimportant, young(er, est), minimal; (a, the) commonness, homogeneity, littleness, meanness, mediocrity, pettiness, smallness; commonly, ordinarily; in detail; some small, of little, a little; for a short (time, while); (to) diminish, minimize, shrink, belittle; does not imply bad or wrong, but sometimes inferiority. chu4 (to) take care of, care for, provide for, tend (to), attend (to), keep, raise, feed, nurture, sustain, nourish, rear, bring up, support, shelter, cherish, train, manage, cultivate, retain, restrain, tame, (bring under) control, herd, domesticate, raise beasts animals, brutes; accumulate, store up, gather, hoard, reserve (s, ed, ing); (a, the) nurture, cultivation, culture, domestication, husbandry, management, training; domestic animal; raising ... beasts; also pronounced xu4 in verb form, to raise animals
09.T, Tuan Zhuan Raising small beasts
The flexible finds a place and high (and) low respond to this So this is called minor concerns Dynamic and yet adaptive The firm (is) central and so the intentions (are) carried out After this, fulfillment Thick clouds (but) no rain: Value (any) forward progress From our western horizon: The influence is not yet in motion
108

09.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.1: advancing, retreating, worth a warrior's resolve)
Returning to one's own path How is this an error? Promising
09.1x Returning to one's own path: This ought to be promising Small digressions are a part of even the greatest, most singular purpose. The path twists and turns. The root learns to live among stones, learning by going forward that the right path was not this or that. If a tree would grow its roots only according to plan, no rocky place would have any trees. Instead they'll explore the cracks in the harshness to make themselves at home. The lightning, crooked as well, turns as it learns where resistance to it is not. This does not seem to slow down its progress. Being true to one's path is not the same thing as being faithful to aim or direction. Life is not the idea of living. Life is not life's goal. Life is what is carried forward, learning as it goes that sometimes it has second thoughts and sometimes less than the perfect adventure. We broaden our paths a little and return with greater choices.
09.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.2: having no other goals, inside preparing meals)
Drawn to returning Promising
09.2x Drawn to returning is in the center Truly nothing of one's own (is) given up A young man returns to his humble home and greets the little woman. He kindles a modest fire and enjoys a bite of dinner. And after they've put the wee ones to bed, they have a bit of time left for small talk. They are partners in a short, little story, about nearness and relevance. Is this a great life or what? No great meaning here, no lofty ideals, nothing to shatter the earth, no mighty strides towards some great and distant purpose. Nothing to get engraved upon tablets. Just feeling one's way, to take the place of high purpose, following subtle longings, getting tugged home, not off to greatness. It is too small an ambit to call it ambition. But small is one of the world's great dimensions. All of life begins and goes forward through time by seed and other small signals. These lucky folks live where the good things begin.
109

09.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
Fan Yao 61.3: finding counterpart, beat drum, quit, weep, sing
The carriage throws off its wheel spokes Husband and wife are wild-eyed
09.3x Husband (and) wife (are) wild-eyed: Unable to rectify domestic affairs The journey across time begins, with big plans to travel great distances. But only a short way from home the small bumps and curves take their toll. Husband and wife set to, attempting to fix each other's perspectives when they both should be fixing the wheel. They are carried away by a miscarriage, of what ought to be important. The grand scheme is lost to short sight, if rolling one's eyeballs can be thought of as sight. The squabble is petty, the problem small, but the power these have to ruin the journey is great. There is surely some extra baggage here, weighty little things maybe not worth the effort, and small stuff not worth the sweat. Especially given that just up ahead are many tall molehills to climb. But small, useful things add up as well: returned to the wheel and hub, those scattered sticks can be spokes again.
09.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.4: somehow to dance across the deep, no mistakes)
Be true The bleeding stops, anxiety leaves No harm is done
09.4x Be true, anxieties leave: A higher (and) unifying purpose Small, insignificant things like to blow themselves out of proportion, never more so than when they play on fear and insecurity, on anxiety and doubt. Then whole new perspectives are needed, larger frames of time or space, different light on the context. Watch the little court fool as he flatters the king, beating himself with a bladder, only a light and shallow amusement, a distraction from serious things. He speaks a truth all twisted safely around. A little well-timed diversion turns the events at the choicest of points. The king can no longer locate his aggression, his worries now feel silly, and all sublimated away. A little finesse stays the heavy hand, a magic idea with an army behind it is halted or set into motion. A mind is no big thing to change, with a twinkle here or a discharge there, a wider horizon perceived or a little time to heal.
110

09.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.5: a gelded boar's tusks, promising)
Being true is as good as a bond Enrichment is by way of one's neighbors
09.5x Being true (is) as good as a bond: There is no enrichment alone Life fights its war with attrition by being the sum of its selves and then more. And thus we learn to grow collectives, we little ones pulling together to tame the greater beast, stronger, more durable in our numbers, a network of allies, with a greater pool of resource and skills. It all begins on a small enough scale, sharing the garden tools and stockpiles for the winter. Now fire and the wheel, or agriculture and husbandry need only be invented one time. We think we wax mighty. Legacies will outlive their heirs, empires their founders, cultures their sages, oracles their humble scribes, just as our pools of genes outlive their living forms. And then we are dwarfed again, out of our own control again, our bonds become chains, our reasons laws. The greatness we have made does not live and feel. When we lose these true bonds we go too far.
09.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.6: three uninvited guests enter pit, respect them)
It has already rained, it is already settled Value the merits already conveyed The woman's persistence is difficult
as the moon approaches full The noble young one's expedition fails
09.6x (It has) already rained, (it is) already settled The merits (already) gathered (and) conveyed * The noble young one's expedition fails: There is a place for uncertainty The zephyr subsides and the plump clouds return to dump water on the land. The mud is some inconvenience, but another season of success is secured. The value of human virtue is on the rise again. Husband and wife feel important and enduring, hoping this time it will last. How soon we all want to forget that the final word is never success, the final state never perfection. A thing to be grateful for becomes glory, meeting our needs becomes conquest. All these will continue for as long as the moon stays full. These are not things to found dynasties on. However timely for this little moment, presumptions upon such simple success are just witless airs, not stands against the winds of time. The rates and the signs go up and down daily. If we truly want something that lasts, we could learn a few lessons from changes.
111

09, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 16, Yu, Readiness qian gua (inverse): 10, Lu, Respectful Conduct jiao gua (reverse): 44, Gou, Dissipation hu gua (nuclear): 38, Kui, Estrangement shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
09, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Malkuth in Yetzirah * Tarot: Ten of Swords * Astrology: Pluto in Air
09, Quotations * We cannot be kind to each other here for an hour. We whisper, and hint, and chuckle, and grin at a brother's shame. However we brave it out, we men are a little breed. --Tennyson * A myriad races came and went; This sphinx hath seen them come and go. --The Kasidah, tr. Sir R. F. Burton * The happiness of most people we know is not ruined by great catastrophes or fatal errors, but by the repetition of slowly destructive little things. --Ernest Dimnet * God is in the details. The Devil is in the details. --Separate sayings. The former came first, the latter is now more popular. * Small causes are sufficient to make a man uneasy, when great ones are not in the way: for want of a block he will stumble at a straw. --Jonathan Swift * Men trip not on mountains, they stumble on stones. --Hindustani proverb * He that condemneth small things shall fall by little and little. --Ecclesiastes * These trifles will lead to serious mischief. --Horace * Take care not to spit against the wind. --Nietzsche, TSZ#28
Note: Thus Spake Zarathustra is quoted often in this section. Quotations are from the Thomas Common translation, which preserves more of the original's fun.
112

GUA 10, LU3, RESPECTFUL CONDUCT
Binary 110 111 = 55; Dui Below, Qian above
10.X, Overall Image The sky above, the lake below Respectful conduct The noble young one, accordingly, distinguishes high and low
to steady the human purpose
Out of the mirror-like depths the stars smile up at the people. That infinite dome above looks so humble and friendly, pretends to be captured. The sage draws lines between the stars and tells his people encouraging stories, trying to give them just the right measures of courage and hope to advance at the perfect pace, helping them to face the night unafraid, upgrading each comprehension one small step at a time, steadying the human will. "As above, so below," he might say. But the worth of this will be tested. If they think too much of themselves, and tread too far too fast on little more than presumptions, they will merit no safety and the game falls apart.
10.0, Treading on the tiger's tail
When it does not bite one, Success
Just who we really are can be some of who we think we are. The heavens give us some room to play around with this. Sometimes we are what we get away with, but the hope for a clean getaway sets some rules. Strength being a cousin to tolerance, the good-natured tiger permits man some pride in his dreamwork. More humored than threatened, it might need truly offensive behavior to make him turn and bite. But what offensive may mean will be his idea, not ours. We want to give ourselves courage to step up and into our destiny, we want to tread as far as we can and test the bounds of the possible and we try to define the right rules of conduct to enable our highest functions. But we don't always want to know when and where to stop. To tell us this is not what the tiger's teeth smile for: this is our idea. The gods that tell us when and where to go are also our idea. Sometimes we, or our gene pools, are wise enough to learn from death and extinction. And yet we have not yet, for instance, learned about war, or what civilized behaviors can be sustained for ages. In time our failures to die might define us, and what survives we might call correct.
113

10.M, Key Words Conduct, deportment, tact, correctness, concordance; taking steps, actualizing Treading carefully, circumspect behavior, action's meetness, conscientiousness Audacious steps, challenge, hazarding, strategy, performance; tests, trials, rites To carry out, honor; living up to standards; walking the walk, finding right track Procedure, protocol; divine guardianship on terms not your own; reality check Perform as `move through form'; function properly; testing faith, tempting fate 10.G, From the Glossary lu3 (to) step, take steps, take a step, tread, walk, trample (on, upon); perform, conduct oneself, carry (on, out), honor, fulfill (s, ed, ing); (a, the) step, footstep (s); shoes, sandals; conduct, behavior, path, track, performance, ceremony, function; respectful conduct, heedful conduct 10.T, Tuan Zhuan Respectful conduct:
The flexible treads upon the firm Pleasure, but also attunement with the creative
And so it is that treading upon the tiger's tail, Without (it) biting one, (is) success
The firm (is) central (and) correct Taking steps in a divine place, and yet escaping suffering, shows wisdom
114

10.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao 06.1: not prolonging certain affairs, small will talk)
Simply treading forward Nothing wrong
10.1x Simple treading's progress: All alone, (but) going forward (with) hope He only walks and nothing more. He does not even amble or stroll. He makes no demands, takes no risks, seeks no adventure, leaves no footprints. You could say he was taking one step at a time, but he's not even counting that high. Along this old road the talk about tigers faded long centuries past. And the tigers themselves went away when the road was first built. It is hardly a thin line to tread, where the consequences of each step are known at the moment the foot falls. As it has been and was proven so long ago, the path is correct because it is safe. He can do little else but advance without error. But this in itself is much. Everyday suchness is no mean attainment for bright and enlightened beings. The bland, simple men do this without thinking, they merely tread through a smaller world in a tinier sliver of time.
10.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.2: not plowing to harvest, still have direction)
Treading the path which is level and easy The secluded one's persistence is promising
10.2x The secluded one's persistence (is) promising: The middle avoids the source of distraction At some point in time the tigers and deer might have taken this path. Then came the first pioneers, on the lookout for tigers and hungry for deer. Then came the lusty and boisterous men with their shovels and picks and their plan to tame this terrain. Now treading on routes trod before, far from all tigers and trials, the followers move, nothing to kill them, nothing to make them stronger, the journey of muted surprises. The map says where to go and where the scenic wonders will be. And if you look on the back of the map all of your questions are answered. It's easy to stay in bounds, in the middle of the wide open road, with plenty of room to maneuver. Modest goals, attainable steps and plausible expectations, who can truly know these are worse than death and insanity? Than cracking open the mind, or shattering views of the world?
115

10.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.3: noble one, all day creating, looking frightful)
The one-eyed are still able to see The lame are still able to take steps Treading upon the tiger's tail Is the bitten one's misfortune The military man works for a greater noble
10.3x The one-eyed (are still) able to see: Not well enough to claim vision * The lame (are still) able to take steps: Not well enough to travel along with * The bitten one's misfortune: The position was less than appropriate * The military man works for a greater noble: The purpose (is) firm Something makes us think that a good human effort will accomplish any miracle. We have ourselves convinced that we are what we dream we can be, that we are what our best have accomplished and that we still live means that we are now fully tested. We make gods to call us their chosen, while the average man's vote on the matter makes it so by consensus. But each human is as each human does, and all humans are the mess that all humans make. This will be the tiger's point of view. We might go on deluding ourselves, seeing just well enough, but without a good perspective, lacking half of the picture, walking just well enough but not for steps that we skip. We act on behalf of the Lord, yet we will not do our best, much less more. A tiger will tear off what he can chew, but a whole half-witted fool isn't more than a bite.
10.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
(Fan Yao 61.4: moon approaches full, the team horse runs away)
Treading upon the tiger's tail Pleading (and) appealing will end in good fortune
10.4x Pleading (and) appealing will end in good fortune: The intentions (are) carried out The plan to tread the tiger's tail is one thing, while to go forth and walk that walk is another. Metaphors, analogies, symbols and plans are unable to bleed to death. It is one thing to say that respect will be called for, quite another to know what this means. Being the favorite children of the one who created the sky full of stars, we do not do well when up against things equal to or better than we are, and the tiger is merely a beast and no peer, and has no soul and will not go to heaven. Thoughts like these will one day pass, torn from our way of thinking one bloody bite at a time. The one who wants to survive this challenge, and not be the meal today, might put himself into perspective and find the respect which regards the tiger as sovereign. Not tigers in general either. Feeling oh so very frail and tasty: oh please, oh please!
116

10.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.5: their kind eats flesh, in going what error?)
Decisive steps Persistence is stressful
10.5x Decisive steps, persistence (is) stressful: The position (is) correct (and) appropriate You are just about ready to do your next and best act, a romp with a real, live tiger. You have trained for long hours with the tamer of two, the one that exists in your mind, alongside your hopes for a future. And now you can be certain that fate has switched their two cages. Anything less than a perfect success will not be less than messy. Even the tiger's most playful nibble will not heal overnight. Commitment will need to be absolute, but the greatest determination will not be the determining part of success. To speak to your sovereign firmly and clearly, to say what you want, with neither false pride nor false modesty, will leave no more room in your mind for what does not belong here. You want his respect, not his pity. The true and correct is what will survive when one is this exposed. Either way, you'll know your fate soon.
10.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
(Fan Yao 58.6: drawn by satisfaction)
Studying the footsteps, examining the omens If these come full circle, supreme good fortune
10.6x Supreme good fortune at the top: A well-earned reward The tiger's will will be done, on the tiger's own terms. The results are now in, if you know how to read them. You do not need to tread upon anything further. The path ends. The tiger lies behind you. If you want to know whether or not you succeeded, first look down at your feet, then back along your path at your footsteps. Now you scratch your head, and think about how well you did. If you have a beard, tug on that and make noises. Examine the omens and signs. Take an inventory. Now count the arms and legs. Look for missing pieces, or sticky, red puddles. Make up a progress report. Debrief. Change pants. If the prints from your feet lead up to where you now stand, this is a really good omen: it means you had great success. What a great joy! But if they fail to go this far, it might mean that you have had bad luck somewhere.
117

10, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 15, Qian, Authenticity qian gua (inverse): 09, Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts jiao gua (reverse): 43, Guai, Decisiveness hu gua (nuclear): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
10, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Netzach in Yetzirah * Tarot: Seven of Swords * Astrology: Venus in Air
10, Quotations * One has no protecting power save prudence. --Juvenal * If oxen or lions had hands which enabled them to draw and paint pictures as men do, they would portray their gods as having bodies like their own. --Xenophanes, fr. 15 * There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy. --Shakespeare, Hamlet * To be capable of respect is today almost as rare as to be worthy of it. --Joseph Joubert * Man is still a savage to the extent that he has little respect for anything that cannot hurt him. --Edgar Watson Howe * Though the boys throw stones at frogs in sport, yet the frogs do not die in sport but in earnest. --Bion * We are what we pretend to be, so we must be careful what we pretend to be. --Kurt Vonnegut * The fingers of saints are still hot from miracles, but can they save themselves? --Joy Harjo
118

GUA 11, TAI4, INTERPLAY
Binary 111 000 = 56; Qian below, Kun above
11.X, Overall Image Heaven and earth interact Interplay Their heirs, accordingly,
Enrich and complete heaven's and earth's natures Confirming and reciprocating heaven's and earth's proper order And thus supporting and protecting the people
The high and low mingle, to conceive the new spring. The distinction between earth and heaven is blurred by the beings partaking of both. To set them apart in body or mind makes no sense. Heaven begins at our feet, even when we stand in deep pits. Earth ends at the tops of our heads, even when we stand on the high mountain tops. And perhaps it is better if these are not one, save in theory, if their coming together makes spring, and the overlap full of new life. Healing divisions, for the sake of the offspring to come, the wise ones encourage things split apart to come back together. Having the best of both worlds might be the only way to get the best out of either.
11.0, Interplay Smallness departs, greatness arrives Promise and fulfillment
The celibate monk looks on, all agog, as even his god takes a bride, to keep from going the way of the small. The sage mounts aloft on the world, and no one can stop him, not even time. Lost are all one-sided claims to omnipotence, when only one of two sides can be but a third of the picture. Heaven here on earth, living and learning, raises up life made of stardust, lit up by light turned to sugar and wood: it all works so well when it all works together and human ideas don't cut it apart. Only the small can remain uninspired. What sort of matter would think spirit foe? What sort of spirit would demonize matter? This lowly earth never was very dead, but what a treat now to see her so much alive. And lofty heaven never was wise, but what a treat now to watch the light figure things out. Small losses here lead to great gains, while giving up bad ideas is almost no loss at all. Not too much heaven and not too much earth mingle in mortal mankind. A disembodied spirit has no way to evolve. Yet most of us seem to want less of one or the other. What sort of masses would want to drag greatness down? Why would a king not want a great people?
119

11.M, Key Words Affirmation, prosperity, accessibility, availability, agreeableness, concert, peace Reconciling opposites, integrating, conjoining, synergy, symbiosis, coexistence Complements, interaction, interpenetration, interregulation, intercourse, harmony Interaction, communication, attunement; thriving, positivity, affirmation, optima To suffuse, permeate; the resolution of paradox, broad-mindedness, hybrid vigor Healthy & productive arrangements; confirmation, facilitation, accord, interlacing
11.G, From the Glossary tai4 (a, the) (free) interplay, harmony, peace, facility, prosperity, happiness, success, extravagance, grandiosity; smooth interaction; affluence; (to be) harmonizing, prospering, prosperous, pervading, exalted, honorable, superior, extravagant, flowering, flourishing, great, affirming, broad minded, liberal, extensive, large, permeating, pervasive, grand, most, extreme, interactive, safe, peaceful, tranquil; the west wind; (to) spread out, suffuse, interpenetrate, permeate, pervade, communicate (s, ed, ing); greatly
11.T, Tuan Zhuan Interplay
Smallness departs, greatness arrives, (With) promise (and) fulfillment:
When this occurs heaven (and) earth interact And so the myriad beings communicate
High (and) low interact and their purposes converge Within (is) light and without (is) shadow
Within (is) strength and without (is) acceptance Within (is) the noble young one and without (are) the common ones The noble young one's principles prevail The common one's principles fade
120

11.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.1: well-favored advance, great opportunity)
Pulling up thatch grass roots And with this, another cluster To expedite* is promising
11.1x Pulling up thatch grass, to expedite (is) promising: The objective remains elsewhere The beings live one life, born from the rubbings of heaven with earth. Things are so interconnected, bound together with common ground and roots, wrapped with their common sunlight and sky, that the notion of self as illusion is not so hard to accept. Life is a network, as fellowships and families too. One mind is as much of a net as two minds or all minds are. Thus, when the tug of some chance pulls at one's fabric, there should be little surprise to see movement elsewhere as well. When one sees that things are about to get better, or that something good needs to be done, the kind of movement seen in grass roots spreads the message and action around. Those of like will, or even like would, will not be far behind. Even if one is alone and peculiar, use the net of connections here: friends can help friends from oceans or eons away.
11.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao 36.2: wounded in left leg, rely on horse's strength)
Embrace the wilderness It is useful to cross the river without a boat Avoid aloofness and neglect Alliances are impermanent Learn the value in balanced action
11.2x Embrace the wilderness (and) learn the value in balanced action:
Thereby to honor the important When you want to take a traveler's money, make him afraid of the places he goes. Then he will pull a great heavy shell around him and fill it with the familiar. Then make your inn look just like his home. Such a one would miss much in any event. But do not malign the one who goes native, who travels as light as he possibly can and interacts with the world. One with big plans and long roads meets the time on the terms of the time, meets the events with all that they have to offer. If no ferryman shows at the crossing, he finds it no setback to swim. His empty gourd floats well. Following yesterday's footsteps is no way to cross a great distance, so he thinks up new things to do on the way, things bright and fit to each situation. Friends come, and then he will go, but this will not chill the meeting. He was never the stranger.
121

11.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.3: sweet commitment, be concerned, avoid error)
There is no level without a slope, No going without a return It is difficult to persist with no errors Do not worry: these are certainties In nourishment find happiness
11.3x No going without a return: Heaven (and) earth meet here Heaven and earth rub together, creating the myriad beings. Rubbings, by definition, go first one way, then the other. So what are these ups and downs but a chance to dwell in small and nearsighted states? The chance to learn to buy low and sell high? To bet on all of the horses? To have both sides as a goal? To take some charge of our own satisfactions? Change refutes only the lesser existence. The sage goes to heaven by filling his belly. With his gratitude secure, he then has his yes and his no. When his pursuit is happiness, he simply goes to where it is stable, to what survives the ups and the downs, to the changes. Wisdom looks ahead, sometimes impossibly far. It can taste next autumn's fruit in advance. But the durable satisfaction knows no thing to be safe from destruction - and no future safe from not happening at all.
11.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
(Fan Yao 34.4: hedge opens, power of the cart in the axle mount)
Fluttering and fussing Not much enrichment by way of these neighbors Not guarding the way to truth
11.4x Fluttering (and) fussing, not much enrichment: Completely neglecting the substance * Not guarding the way to truth: Within the heart (is) the hope His silos are all filled up, but he twitters down to his neighbors to borrow a peck of rice and some comfort. There he is met with affected surprise and delight, according to the customs, pursuant to all the newest rules of behavior. Every gesture is studied, an apt elaborate surface for every occasion. Is all of this motion and noise to fill up the awkward stillness and silence? Or does the time spent in all of this meaningless mess speak to deeper needs unfulfilled? Deep down they do want to trust and relate, to find value deep in each other, to say what is on their minds and express what is in their hearts, somewhere under those fears. They orbit around these needs, the silence and stillness a great, gaping hole in each of their beings, with no idea that such an empty place is a reservoir of strength. This is the room we have made for each other.
122

11.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.5: waiting at wine and food, persistence promising)
Lord Yi's gift of his maiden daughter in marriage Showed the way to happiness and supreme good fortune*
11.5x (Showing) the way to happiness (and) supreme good fortune: In the center (is) the way to bring about the promise When the Sovereign Yi gave his daughter in marriage, the lady could only outrank her new husband. But a royal decree made them equals. She really had little choice to marry sideways or up. So what could have been the down side here? To be unable to hold her old glamour and glory over her new partner's head? Anyone given some memory can live in the past. Some might live entirely backwards, backing up into the future, watching behind for new stuff, not taking a single stride forward, wondering why they don't know where they are going. Back-to-back is a painful and difficult way to share intercourse. Forbidding the perfect wedding, with all of that pomp and glory, reduced them to two human beings accepting and loving their limits, seeing eye to eye. We could all show a little more modesty in the face of what we could be.
11.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.6: What is heaven's thoroughfare? Fulfillment)
The city wall falls back into the moat Do not advance the military From within one's own district, explain the orders To persist is disgraceful
11.6x The city wall falls back into the moat: One's own orders (are) confused Fortifying the town with two great lines of defense, they built a great wall from the stones they had gathered while digging the moat. But today this wall falls apart, and it falls back into the moat, right in the middle of big plans to send the host marching out to new conquests and distant frontiers. Here is an ominous omen indeed. What can this tell them about their home town? When upholding one thing, by negating or denying another, synergy is reversed. The whole is rendered less than its parts. Two no's do not make a yes, as the theory promised they might, but solve into zero or chaos. Who will think to attack these ruins? Can they open up and wage peace? Can peace now be seen as more than the absence of war, or safety from an attack? The wall did not create strength. Can they rebuild with the stones from this lesson?
123

11, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 12, Pi, Separating qian gua (inverse): 12, Pi, Separating jiao gua (reverse): 12, Pi, Separating hu gua (nuclear): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 1st Moon (Feb)
11, Notes * 11.1 Note `To expedite' (zheng) in 11.1, "Persistence" (zhen) in 12.1. * 11.5 When Di Yi (second to last emperor of the Shang dynasty) gave the bride away to a less powerful and wealthy Zhou noble, she "dressed down" in acceptance of her humbler station, leaving, as is implied both here and at Gua 54.5, much room for personal growth. More of the story is told at 54.5.
11, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Chokmah in Assiah * Tarot: Two of Pentacles * Astrology: Uranus in Earth
11, Quotations * Allah is great, no doubt, and Juxtaposition his prophet. --Arthur H. Clough * All the parts of the world are lovers, and every part of the universe is drunk with encounter. --Rumi * when the oak begs permission of the birch to make an acorn - valleys accuse their mountains of having altitude - and March denounces April as a saboteur then we'll believe that incredible unanimal mankind (and not until) --e.e. cummings, XIAPE * People do not understand that that which is at variance with itself agrees with itself. There is a harmony in the bending back, as in the cases of the bow and the lyre. --Heraclitus, fr. 117 * I am your tongue, your eye. I am your senses, your contentment and anger. Go, be detached! That one who hears through me and sees through me is you. Not only are you the possessor of the secret but you are the secret too. --Rumi
124

GUA 12, PI3, SEPARATING
Binary 000 111 = 07; Kun below, Qian above
12.X, Overall Image
Heaven and earth do not interact Separating The noble young one, accordingly,
conserves virtue and avoids trouble Not allowing himself luxury in the form of compensation
A sacred kind of sadness and heartbreaking beauty accompany the fall. A cold and indolent sky torments a field of parched grain. You envy those geese going south, going their own separate ways. The parasites and the rot do have their proper places. Half of the healthiest forests are death and decay. Not growing is not a stagnation. Nations, cultures and civilizations have their autumns as well, wherein the parasites might well belong, when decay might be a good thing. But there is not much here for a sage or great leader. They may become uninvolved and withdraw to conserve their resources, not taking bait, not giving wrongness something to rally and live for.
12.0 Separating* oneself from inferior people*
Those not worth the young noble's loyalty Greatness departs, smallness arrives
Greatness is done here. The small move in and seize power. All intelligence leaves the masses. Now petty tyrants, passive aggressives, parasites and looters take over the kingdom. Scavengers gnaw on what's left. Do not fear the wolves here: selection brought evolution this far. Beware instead of sheep in sheep's clothing. The wolves might be their salvation. Priorities now are established by polls, and values by a vote. Rules will stand in for ethics. Majorities stand just as ready as any dictator could be to play the part of the tyrant. The will of the people is only peer pressure writ large, like mob rule but in slower motion. A world goes numb as the work of our glorious progress is left to decay and gravity. The middle ground is barren, more tedium than toil. How many times have we done this now? How many cultures collapsed has this one oracle seen? And yet this is how things should be. The things which have failed to merit survival fail to survive; things which are not sustainable cannot be sustained. How evolved and smart can we be and not learn this? So what are young nobles to do here? Just leave things? Or leave things which can be rediscovered next spring?
125

12.M, Key Words Disjunction, discontinuity, disengagement, pulling apart, alienation, indifference Denial, negation, division, schism, pettiness, aloofness, apathy, numbness, decay Stagnation, entropy, disorder, decadence, standstill; to misunderstand, disapprove Ignorance, small-mindedness, lowest common denominators, leaders out of touch Stratification, abstraction, disintegrity, disarray, dissonance, disharmony, discord, Non-participation, non-cooperation, negating and the need to negate, wrongness
12.G, From the Glossary pi3 (to be) inferior, wrong, worthless, decaying, bad, stagnant, stagnating, disintegrating, alienated, inappropriate; (to) deny, refuse, stop, negate, disapprove (of), separate (from) (s, ed, ing); on the contrary; not, if not, or not, not do; (a, the) standstill, stagnation, separation, disintegrity, negation, denial, incoherence; [entropy]; what is not so; not, wrong; also pronounced fou3: to not be, if not, if out of
12.T, Tuan Zhuan Separating oneself from inferior people
(Who) are not worth a noble young one's loyalty Greatness departs, smallness arrives: When this occurs heaven (and) earth do not interact
And so the myriad beings do not communicate High (and) low do not interact
And so all under heaven lack government Within (is) darkness and without (is) light
Within (is) weakness and without (is) strength Within (are) the common people and without (is) the noble young one The common people's principles prevail The noble young one's principles fade
126

12.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.1: with no pretense, to go forward is promising)
Pulling up thatch grass roots And with this, another cluster Persistence is promising and satisfying
12.1x Pulling up thatch grass, persistence (is) promising: The purpose remains noble Things just begin to feel and go wrong. Already a cluster of citizens know it, but it isn't the old and wise ones: it's mostly young sprouts, and a handful of older artists and poets. The network begins underground, to counter the culture. As if informed by some hidden connections, they begin to uproot and then to transplant themselves. The fabric of things connected already makes up in microcosm a new, little culture and seed for the mulch of the past. Radical means from the root, and so it is true that this group gets carried away before wisdom has come to full bloom. But what they leave behind is in an advanced decay and away is where they should go, a homeless band of refugees, not yet wise to tactics and stratagems, yet mature enough to get out from under a failing system. The tribe they now belong to is far, far older than this.
12.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao 06.2: unable to contend, village escapes suffering)
Embracing servitude The common one's promise Is the mature one's worthless fulfillment
12.2x The mature one's worthless fulfillment: Avoid the herd's distractions The decadent civilization makes up a world all its own. Its principles and its truths will define themselves into existence and just hang there with nothing to stand on, with only a little past and a little less future, in some void between heaven and earth. Its laws are its order and its coin its religion. A sage will lose most of his family, and mature human beings will question their own mental health. The people are sold on their sins and then get sold on salvation. And whoever holds praise and forgiveness is master. Want some roundabout power? Establish your place in a victimized class, then come forth to claim special privilege. The system is rigged, there is no way to get free here. So how do you win with self-rule forbidden, when you prize a clear conscience above the rules of the game? You do a great job choosing your battles.
127

12.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.3: tangled retreat, anxiety, distress, manage help)
Embracing the unworthy
12.3x Embracing the unworthy: The position is not appropriate We all have heard some story of a man who loses his life while saving a dog or a chicken. Society does this too when it loses sight of objectives and tries to move past selection. They will scold: Don't be judgmental, or ask: Why be so negative? All things are relatives to all other things, in the interest of fairness, all things are just being equal. Buried under this hooey is a primate's cortex that begs them to stop and look to first needs first. But the lowest common denominator does not want to hurt its brain, so looters and leaders weigh the same, principles go unchallenged, excellence is perversely rejected and authority cannot even question itself. Simply existing has the same value as working a lifetime on merit. Sometimes there is a great weakness in numbers. You must have a value to say that this is not worth it.
12.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.4: observe country's splendors, visit the sovereign)
Having higher purpose is not a mistake But this kind of thing differs from happiness
12.4x Having higher purpose is not a mistake: The intentions (are) carried out There are higher laws than the kingdom's, higher mandates and purposes than kings either give or follow. There may never be social pressure to step up or reach up and grasp these. Almost all the rewards are given for being some bland kind of normal, so praise and support will not be pouring in. But deep inside the mammalian brain, a mind wants its social support. Not selling out has a steep price as well. The person of conscience, the one who is able to give or withdraw consent, who claims the right to civilly disobey, who looks more often to the next generations than to the next appointment, is not overwhelmed with rewards. The transformation of humankind is called the great work and not the big fun. But higher purpose is not about gain, it is that you must give and can't stop. Happiness will measure things elsewhere.
128

12.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.5: regrets pass, loss or gain, to go is promising)
Easing out of separation The mature human being's promise: This passes, that passes As surely as mulberry seedlings
12.5x The mature human being's promise: The position (is) correct (and) appropriate The end of a difficult time is approaching. What has rotted and decayed begins to be known as compost and mulch. Now the small things that are growing are the young and their hopes for a better tomorrow. As each full set of seasons will bring its own lessons to bear, and several bring history's teachings, the flexible young one is now given learnings to lean on, about what went wrong in the past. Against the ill winds that we now know are out there, we stake our hopes for a future. Mulberry seedlings might pass in a couple of ways, but we want them to outgrow the need for the stakes and this means living and breathing, provisional plans, a healthy mix of the firm and the flexible. Later a grove of strong trees might even change the climate. For today through twenty years hence, life is reconstitution: the roots are fed well enough now.
12.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.6: offering counsel, weeping, sniveling, no harm)
Overcoming the separation At first denial, then rejoicing
12.6x Separation ends (and is) then overcome: (But) how could this be sustained? The wheel of fortune has come back around, spun off a new group of bright-eyed young sages, carried away an old load of dimwits, with their baggage of hope and despair, their little deaths and rebirths. Neither will joy last forever, although from what it has just undergone it can learn to last a bit longer, assuming some lessons in expectation and gratitude. The good and the true will not hold themselves erect. A higher order is endless work, as life is work against heat-death and falling apart. Have we learned yet why up and down are so oft interchanged? To look first for the longer trend and a larger arrangement? And above all, why do we seek our security in things that we don't think will change? Change is so foreign and scary to people they would choose endless boredom, or endless damnation, if only these be eternal.
129

12, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 11, Tai, Interplay qian gua (inverse): 11, Tai, Interplay jiao gua (reverse): 11, Tai, Interplay hu gua (nuclear): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 7th Moon (Sep)
12, Notes * 12.0 Pi is often translated `obstruction' but this misses the point entirely. Here the two forces are going their own separate ways: the problem is that they are not interfering with each other. * 12.0 The inferior person (fei r en) is not the same as the common or the average person (xiao ren ), although the Tuan Zhuan and Xiao Xiang fail to make this distinction. The latter term is value neutral, the former is value negative. Although the net effect of an excess of commonness is still Pi, or entropy, this is attributable more to simple ignorance and ethical infirmity (bu gang ) than to evil, or arrogant ignorance or moral depravity. The inferior may be seen as entropy's vanguard. There is a proper place in the world for the common person, no proper place for the inferior person.
12, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Briah in Yetzirah * Tarot: Three of Swords * Astrology: Neptune in Air
12, Quotations * Tie two birds together. They will not be able to fly even though they now have four wings. --Rumi * Looking aside: let that be my sole negation. --Nietzsche, Joyful Wisdom * It is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing. --Shakespeare, Macbeth * What loneliness is more lonely than distrust? --George Eliot * Corruption / never has been compulsory, when the cities lie at the monster's feet there are left the mountains. --Robinson Jeffers * Monsters exist, but they are too few in number to be truly dangerous. More dangerous are the common men, the functionaries ready to believe and act without asking questions. --Primo Levi * More harm has been done by weak persons than by wicked persons. --Harry Kennedy * It is no measure of health to be well adjusted to a profoundly sick society. --Krishnamurti
130

GUA 13, TONG2 REN2, FELLOWSHIP w/ OTHERS
Binary 101 111 = 47; Li below, Qian above
13.X, Overall Image Heaven accompanies flame Fellowship with Others The noble young one, according to kind and family,
distinguishes the beings
In view of star-spattered heaven above, a flame rains its sparks into night, each spark a star, adding its point of light. Around this, a constellation of wide-eyed hominids perform their rites to the grand design. And the sage is found among them, fostering the fellowship with analogies, distinguishing the beings by family and class, to draw things together, not cut them apart. And yet he will keep all relevant scales in mind. The fire does not enlighten the night, but the flame will make for a focus in common, a unifying vision, a bonding experience and quite a little spectacle. So gathered here we agree to disagree, exchange the best of our stories and songs, make our peace.
13.0 Fellowship with Others on the frontier
Fulfillment Worthwhile to cross the great stream And worth the noble young one's persistence
The little groups huddle together, at least well enough to find warmth and keep up their courage and hope. In the midst of each circle, the radius point, is one thing held in consensus, a thing believed in, an interest or goal, a line of descent or a niche in the world. But the stars give humankind far too much room for agreement, no one school of thought can possibly fill all the available space. Thus we push and branch outwards and cover this sphere and peer into space from all different angles and the oddest directions. And so the search for the greater world means going across the great waters, across our cultural boundaries, across the ages of time, outside of our niches and sometimes out of our minds. After ages of trials and wars, the clans start to take steps towards consensus, overcoming our disparities by returning to our old common grounds. But we share much fantasy still, including the notion that there is one truth and that only one school may own it. We yet need the breadth of all of our minds to get around all of our problems. Our hope is as much in seeing things not the same way. Our frontier isn't the known: is that not the whole point of frontiers?
131

13.M, Key Words Society, social organization, human association, classes of people, community Extended family, fraternity, agreement, coalition; crossing cultural boundaries Ethnocentrism, anthropocentrism & xenophobia; common purposes & causes Mutual endorsement and admiration societies, like-minded people, consensus Schools of thought, group-think, cultural diversity, relativity of mores & values Belief systems, collective associations, mass follies; symposiums, convergences
13.G, From the Glossary tong2 (to) agree, assemble, assimilate, affiliate, associate, belong, come together, commune, partake in, conform to, congregate, converge, concur, gather, harmonize, identify, join, make uniform, share, unite (s, ed, ing) (in, with, to); (to be) alike, all, as one, colloquial, concordant, conforming, consensual, equal, identical, identified, in the company of, like minded, one, one with, similar, the same, united, together with, unanimous,; (a, the) community, assembly (ies), associates, association, colleagues (of), agreement, convergence, fellowship (with), meeting, joining, gathering, harmony, identity, oneness, partners, sameness, unity, union; of the same ...; fellow...; simultaneously, concurrently; and, with, as well as ren2 (a, the) person, people, man, woman, one(s), other(s), another, human being, individual (s); each (one), other persons/people; anybody, anyone, everybody, everyone, somebody, someone (else)('s); some, those; humanity, humankind, mankind, society; character, citizen, fellow, folk; inhabitant, member, occupant, participant, persona, personality, population, personnel, staff, role; (in) adulthood; (of) maturity; (to be) human, adult, grown, mature; humanity's; (a, the) person's, people's, occupant's; fellow-; -body, -man, -person, -ist
13.T, Tuan Zhuan Fellowship with others
The flexible finds a position, gains the center and resonates with the creative
So this is called fellowship with others Fellowship with others says that
Fellowship with others on the frontier (is) fulfillment Worthwhile to cross the great stream (Meaning) higher order endeavor Refinement (and) clarity make use of strength The central (lines) (are) correct (and) correspond The noble young one (is) principled Only the noble young one develops the capacity
To comprehend the direction of all under heaven
132

13.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.1: withdrawing tail in trouble, not useful to go)
Fellowship with others at the gate Not a mistake
13.1x Departing the gate (in) fellowship with others: Given this, who is in error? The fellowship meets at the gate, sharing rumors and stories, pestering the visitors for news of a large world not very distant, getting big earfuls of wondrous reports, of a world of difference out there. Common cause is so easy here, but they start to poke their noses out into the larger world, not yet funneling out, not ranging far and wide. They begin to speak about going beyond and plan their first adventure, from the threshold of this gate to the first great shore, beginning to open to newer ideas. Some men devour their enemies, some eat their fallen comrades, while another tribe buries good meat in the dirt. This must be witnessed by someone! As a child leaves crib, a youth leaves home, a man leaves province, the sage leaves nations to embrace a whole earth and siblings across the great waters. But first is the first great shore.
13.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.2: see a dragon in the field, meet a mature one)
Fellowship with others only within the clan Embarrassing
13.2x Fellowship with others (only) within the clan: An embarrassing course Communities of interests not shared are not wrong, nor is seeking ground not held in common. Yes, others are different. And other races and cultures are different, even under their skin. But no more different than one of your eyes from the other, giving a disparity that allows a perception of depth. This fellowship admits only one clan. They only seek similarities to their own superior persons. Thus even their gods look like members. They will fashion and arm their devils from everything not their own. When they journey across the great water they drag the familiar along and make a big deal out of spreading their ways. They think of themselves as especially chosen and as given the only truth. But this is inbred and incestuous. And thus they spawn monsters while thinking to breed some superior race. Superior man is their sacrifice.
133

13.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.3: tethered ox, drifter's gain, townsfolks' disaster)
Caching weapons in the underbrush Climbing one's highest hill Three years without rising up
13.3x Caching weapons in the underbrush: The rivalry (is) strong * Three years with no exuberance: Security in action He really tried hard to find fellows among the others, but his trust is easily broken. In life one can reach out to many wrong someones. Imagine your view of the odds when this happens on the first trip beyond. It might take three years to come back. Suspicion mounts. When looking for possible enemies the suspects are everywhere; any divergence or slight disagreement means enmity. Thus he makes no loud noises, no demonstrations, no startled movements. But as safe as these years might be from attack, they are also silent, empty and joyless. Better to use those years up on the hill as time to ponder the broader horizons, the view from the top to look for better ways down and to learn what he thought was coldness was not really caring. Have three years been wasted? Not if one's real opponents are now known as fear and mistrust.
13.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.4: enriching the family, full of promise)
Mounting those battlements But not capable of attack Promising
13.4x Mounting those battlements Means that nothing can be done * One's promise (Is) due to being distressed and then revising the principles Equipped to face the great world with a courage and caution both learned at home, he takes the evening watch and climbs the town's wall with his spears, more ready for encounters in the sense of self-defense. Scouting from above, awaiting some sign of foes to menace his line, his gaze keeps coming back to the grizzly band of tough looking nomads camped outside of the gate, scarred up, missing limbs and presumably teeth. They are probably telling insightful and humorous stories, but he hears only ominous mumbling. That's a kerchief on the big one's belt, not scalps. At least from up here he can watch how people behave, although this is less than the wealth of those stories. He dares not open the gate and invite them in to dinner. Going out would change him. Is he not a captive here, in this his own home town?
134

13.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
(Fan Yao 30.5: tears streaming like water, grief, good fortune)
Fellowship with others begins with wailing and weeping but then follows with laughter
Mighty armies can entertain each other
13.5x Fellowship with others with such a beginning: Through balance (comes) orientation * Mighty armies entertaining each other: Praising each other's abilities We are forced by our fate into fellowship and condemned to this earth with billions of parasites: the poor ones intrude on our pockets, sick ones intrude on our health, old ones discourage our lofty ambitions and dead ones remind us too much of time. Those with a different language or color are not much better than beasts. And only two men with bad will, armies and opposite views, can double all of these problems. Those who have crossed some great streams in their lives and longed for home from the far distant shores, know that these others are not the alien beings portrayed in the struggles for power. Some might think to ask: what or whose needs do the enemies serve? No social contract cannot be rewritten. No rules of engagement are sacred. Enjoying diversity overcomes differences better than making both sides the same.
13.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.6: leopard transforms, common folk change masks)
Fellowship with others on the frontier Nothing to regret
13.6x Fellowship with others on the frontier: The goals (are) not yet achieved Let's end the debate with a compromise: Some of us evolved and some never did. Perspective softens frustration - great things take time in large portions. So today a few of the males rejoice with some of the females in the high mountain meadows and wide open fields. This world is not yet at peace, nor is humankind more than halfway evolved. No guarantees exist of continued human existence. The greatest truths are still mysteries. No creature comes down from the sky to right all wrong. Nor yet has the night sky returned a glad echo. The cosmos is quiet and still much too big. This tribe which has gathered this day is a marginal fringe on an uncharted ground. But the cult is the seed of a culture and humankind is best adapted to live in these small bands. Below in the meadow life embraces life. Good things begin.
135

13, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 07, Shi, The Militia qian gua (inverse): 14, Da You, Big Domain jiao gua (reverse): 14, Da You, Big Domain hu gua (nuclear): 44, Gou, Dissipation shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
13, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Tipareth in Yetzirah * Tarot: Six of Swords * Astrology: Sol in Air
13, Quotations * The world does not know that we must all come to an end here, but those who know it - their quarrels cease at once. --Buddha, The Dhammapada * The bowels of existence do not speak to man, except as man. --Nietzsche * "Know thyself" is a good saying, but not in all situations. In many it is better to say "know others." --Menander * No man can have society upon his own terms. If he seek it, he must serve it too. --Emerson * A wise man associating with the vicious becomes an idiot; a dog traveling with good men becomes a rational being. --Arabic proverb * Whoever is not a misanthrope at forty years can never have loved mankind. --Sebastien Chamfort * The only thing you will ever be able to say in the so-called 'social' sciences is: "Some do, some don't". --Ernst Rutherford * Hell is other people. --Jean Paul Sartre * A wise man gets more use from his enemies than a fool from his friends. --Baltasar Gracian
136

GUA 14, DA4 YOU3, BIG DOMAIN
Binary 111 101 = 61; Qian below, Li above
14.X, Overall Image Flame in heaven above Big domain The noble young one, accordingly,
suppresses the bad and promotes the good Accepting heaven's terms and higher laws
Flame from the skies: the squandered power of affluent suns, a trust for the wise and the strong, is fought for and over by proud humankind. Much of earth's mass is made of precious metal, first fused in the cores of stars; the precious jewels were made in the depths of our world. We are not smart enough to claim these in place, so we mine and extract our few insignificant bits and then, with our fires and flames, we make choices and values to guide them. We, too, are as gods, really small ones, authoring good and evil, trying to add a clearer perception to strength. Such powers command by their nature, but this all begins with the power to give things a value.
14.0, Big domain Supreme fulfillment
Amounts and degrees of possession and power are not any measure of greatness. To admire or want things in proper amounts and degrees gives them worth. Folks somehow come up with ideas of what is good and bad, of what is worth having, or worth letting be, or worth fighting for or against. The weights and standards are set. Economies and values, rates of appreciation and interest, what constitutes a prize or endowment: all these are settled and fixed into tangible things as though by silent votes. Though all of these were once verbs. We forget that to be able to treasure is as good as treasure itself. We economize and make value, we appreciate and take an interest, we prize what we love, we endow what we nurture, we option our choices, we redeem our lives, we reward ourselves with things that cost nothing. Gold is only a weight that turns light yellow. Yet we obsess with the seeming of things. A river belongs to the one who wades in, the mountains to those who can climb or admire. The wide eyed sage is the one with great holdings, dominions beyond possession, in wielding his power to give and take value. If you own the key why buy the vault?
137

14.M, Key Words Possession of greatness, wealth, endowments, enrichment, abundance, affluence Assets, dominion, domain as the home, belonging here, tenure; laying of claims Vantage, command, territory, (spheres of) influence; enterprise, venture, credit Value, interest, appreciation, treasuring, worth, gratitude, counting of blessings Wealth of experience; owning one's power to assign, rearrange and revise values Prometheus (foresight), gave fire from heaven to man; entitlement, appropriation
14.G, From the Glossary da4 (to be) accomplished, best, better, big, complete, critical, crucial, developed, enormous, entire, extreme, far, full, fully grown, good, grand, great(er, est), heavy, high, large(r), (very, greatly) important, long, loud, major, mature, mighty, more, most, noble, noteworthy, old, overall, (more, most) perfect, pure, realized, ripe, seasoned, serious, significant, strong, successful, vast, whole, wholesome, vital; a lot of, full of, lots of; master-, (a, the) completeness, (full) development, entirety, grand(eur, ness), greatness, growth, (great) importance, largesse, majority, maturity, vastness, wholeness; a great deal, (very) much, very; already, completely, entirely, fully, greatly, thoroughly, wholly, en masse , well-; of (great, crucial, vital) importance you3 (to) be, (in) being; (there, one, it, this, they, those) is, am, are, was, were, being, has, have, had, has/have been, will be, come(s) to be; (there is) one, someone, something; exist, remain, stay (s); become, arise, appear, grow, attain to, learn to be, turn into; (there) will, would, could, may, might, can (be); (this) will get; (if there) is, are, was, were; (were) there, one, it, they; have, (in) having; (one, that, they) has, have, had; has one's, have their; had (one's, their); contain, hold (onto), keep, maintain, own, retain, possess, stay; presume, assume, remember, take ... for granted; will have, (one they) (will, could, might, may) have; bring (up, about); get, achieve, acquire, attain, capture, claim, earn, find, gain, learn, take on; seize, take, took (possession of) (s, ed, ing); (to be) present, there; in possession of, possessed of, with; contained, held; abundant, rich, plentiful; (a, the) attainment, claim, possession (of); being, existence, presence; domain, dominion (in, over); what exists/is there; the, this, this one, the one in question; something; anybody, somebody, someone ('s); given this/that, this (being) given; of, about, with, for; His (especially of the sovereign), his, her, its, their; will, would ... with, to, for; -ing, -ous
14.T, Tuan Zhuan Big domain
The flexible finds a distinguished position, in the great center, While high (and) low respond to this So this is called big domain Its qualities (are) firmness (and) vigor and also refinement (and) clarity Resonating with heaven and moving with the seasons This is, accordingly, supremely fulfilling
138

14.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.1: cauldron's upturned feet, expelling the stagnant)
Having no commerce with trouble To never be wrong A hardship, but otherwise not a mistake
14.1x The big domain (of) first nine (Is a) lack of commerce with trouble He remains down below to watch those above become slaves to their cravings for wealth, compromise themselves for bad dreams, sell their souls for false promises. He wants to be free of this servitude and to have no commerce with something so harmful. He might be right about what is inferior here. The propertied classes may spend their whole lives to command no more than the power to rearrange what they look at. But if the real wealth is a freedom, he will never find it in this much aversion to common human traits, or by twisting up his eyes at every evil he can find. A true wealth moves, interacts and makes changes, and it may or may not have its uses for big bags of money. If scowling is hard on the stomach maybe it's bad for health. So why not instead set compelling examples of a noble and wholesome simplicity?
14.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
Fan Yao 30.2: golden radiance, most promising
The great wagon is for loading Have somewhere to go Nothing is wrong
14.2x The great wagon (is) for loading: To add to the middle (means) to be without loss Great wealth is like this great wagon, waiting to be loaded or emptied, with a value in either condition: loaded means it is useful, emptied means it is mobile, ready to respond to the unforeseen chance. Wealth depends more upon what is moved, and the movement itself, than upon what is owned or contained. It might make just as much use of things which it does not have. And rolling stock is not just something possessed, it needs to get dirty and worn. As long as the supply is moving towards the demand, wealth grows. Try hauling cargo both ways, moving in both directions with things in demand. Free trade will see all sides advance. Then you can love your work, get paid to travel and have a clear conscience as well. This is like rubbing the portly belly of luck. You are this vehicle here. Cargo is neither you nor your future.
139

14.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.3: seeing wagon held up, no beginning, but an end)
The prince presents offerings to the son of heaven The common people cannot
14.3x The prince presents offerings to the son of heaven: (For) common people, harmful Why not stand out on the promontory and throw gold coins at the sun? The prince donates wealth to his wealthier lord, while the commoner people cannot understand why things move in this direction. There is no clear ulterior motive, and nothing to gain by such loss. They might sooner harm themselves than be caught acting thus. And herein there may be a clue. You cannot hold flame from the skies in clenched hands, so if you want to grasp, grasp that wealth is all about circulation. In theory, such offerings are not made to get more in return, but to work on your worthiness, to express your gratitude, to offer up trust that good will come back around and to practice the sun's way with wealth. For the gifted ones the higher power is giving. The needy cannot escape real needs and they cannot move on until these are met.
14.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.4: a young bull's corral, most promising)
This is not one's own domain No blame
14.4x Not being (in) one's own domain, no blame: Wisdom distinguishes plainly Some say that we own this world by virtue of having laid claims. Some say that we inherit it from those who came before us. Some say we borrow it from people yet to come, a distant seven generations from now. And another group claims that it won't be truly possessed by human beings at all. If we are to survive, in any pleasant way, we will learn that these property rights are nothing more than a trust, for the whole of life to come, all of the myriad beings, including those beings who might become more and better than human. Our rights are to the use of the fruits, not to cut down the tree, not because any one of us says so, but because some day time and the facts will insist. Wealth is more than attracting the priciest brides, or stoking the envy in those less well off. But dominion is really no more than making ourselves at home.
140

14.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.5: dragon in flight, rewarding to see a mature one)
Their truths resemble commerce If also dignified, promising
14.5x Their truths resemble commerce: Confidence serves to manifest the purposes * (It is) assuming dignity (which) leads to good fortune, Naturally, and avoiding pretense Culture, economics, genetics and climate all obey similar rules. However complex and chaotic these seem to be, little bits of knowledge can normally be applied to alter the outcomes or nudge them further from random. The first or most useful of these is to take some measure of charge over things inside your power and not be a victim or a leaf in the wind. Things in your power might not include the whole world, but things like your hands, your wings, your mind and your values. When you merely do as you're told the game will play you. Quantity, not quality, will be master and the size of your pile will measure its value. It's no wonder the junk that such piles collect. But a metaphor of commerce does not need to cheapen things. Free minds and markets are for sovereigns great and small. Our hope lies in merit and dignity.
14.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
(Fan Yao 34.6: billy goat butts hedge, problem is opportunity)
Assistance comes from heaven Promising Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
14.6x Big domain at the top (is) promising: Through heaven's assistance Heaven help us! What shelter is this with no roof or lid? How easily blessings are gained from the stars! All the space and time we can use, in parsecs of permission. If you have the proper attitude, protection even covers poverty and loss, while doing nothing to prevent them. The trick is to keep vision lively, to keep looking around, down in appreciation or up in awe, back in reflection or ahead in hope, and sideways for things that you missed. It's the one track mind that misses the riches, the favors, the wealth, the solutions to problems and the ways out of trouble. This is all spread before us, all of the clues that we need. The greatest gift is our gratitude: it's this that makes lots of stuff treasure. And divine guardianship is our maintenance problem: it works best when we work on our value and worth and stop taking life for granted.
141

14 Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 08, Bi, Belonging qian gua (inverse): 13, Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others jiao gua (reverse): 13, Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others hu gua (nuclear): 43, Guai, Decisiveness shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
14, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Chokmah in Atziluth * Tarot: Two of Wands * Astrology: Uranus in Fire
14, Quotations * The ass loaded with gold still eats thistles. --German proverb * Natural wealth is limited and easily obtained; the wealth defined by vain fancies is always beyond reach. --Epicurus * I desire ... to leave this one fact clearly stated: there is no wealth but life. --John Ruskin * Let him go where he will, he can only find so much beauty or worth as he carries. --Emerson * From the Sun did I learn this, when it goeth down, the exuberant one: gold doth it then pour into the sea, out of inexhaustible riches, so that even the poorest fisherman roweth even with golden oars! For this did I once see, and did not tire of weeping in beholding it. --Nietzsche, TSZ *56-3 * Valuing is creating: hear it ye creating ones! Valuation itself is the treasure and jewel of the valued things. --ib., #15 * Your true value depends entirely on what you are compared with. --Bob Wells * The chief value of money lies in the fact that one lives in a world in which it is overestimated. --H. L. Mencken * The price is what you pay; the value is what you receive. --Unknown
142

GUA 15, QIAN1, AUTHENTICITY
Binary 001 000 = 08; Gen below, Kun above
15.X, Overall Image Within the earth is a mountain Authenticity The noble young one, accordingly,
diminishes the excessive and adds to the deficient Appraising things with fair allocation*
The mountain stands in its past and future tense. Beyond its youth and its old age, in both directions, is earth. The level horizon hides the distant peak, while another peak stands just under the surface. Seen from time's great perspective, the greatest of things has its end. To find that end does not diminish a thing. To admit our own ends and limits does not diminish ourselves. This speaks of an equity, and not of an equality, not of making high things low or low things high, but adding some missing perspective and finding things as they are, from various points of view. We may see an excess and take some away, we may see a need and fill it, but this is just fairness.
15.0, Authenticity* Fulfillment The noble young one gets results
Earth exalted above the mountain? It just is, like an everyday suchness. Why do we wax so hyperbolic and try to turn things into poems? We do not need to level things either: high is high, except from above; we are small, except to the bugs. Modesty is simply insistence that growth be honest and sure, and to be rid of what interferes. Things are brought to completion and closure. It is too hard to keep things in all of their proper contexts if we do not know where things end and their contexts begin. To be genuine, fair, authentic or modest might mean declining a particular honor, or dismissing a point of pride, but real, rock-solid modesty is not about how one declines or accepts an honor, or refuses to allow a little pride. It's all about giving honor where due, and knowing where pride has its boundaries. We hear how the world is perfect just as it is. Why must we be so extreme? Why do we even presume to speak of perfection? The world is what it is. Cash those dreams in for cash value and what you have left is much more stupendous than perfect. It moves along fine as it is with accidents, defects and all. We seem to want to deceive ourselves forward.
143

15.M, Key Words Due regard, respectfulness, to honor others according their merit; ordinary reality Genuine, unpretentious, unassuming, modest, accurate, realistic, honest, authentic Consistent, inexcessive; basis in fact, surety, solidity, firmness, stability, sobriety Curtailing the superfluous, parsimony; thoroughness, realism; rocks in the rough On solid foundations; exacting appreciation, accurate assessment, groundedness Simplicity, nothing extra or extraneous, restraint, limiting to the most stable form
15.G, From the Glossary qian1 (a, the) authenticity, respectfulness, respect, modesty; (to be) unassuming, authentic, respectful, yielding, deferent, reverent, humble, modest; deficient
15.T, Tuan Zhuan Authenticity (means) fulfillment
The heavenly principle completes the lowly With honor and clarity
The earthly principle (is) humble, (Even) while moving upwards
The heavenly principle diminishes the superfluous And adds to the modest
The earthly principle transforms the superfluous And replenishes the modest
Ghosts (and) spirits (both) haunt the superfluous And enrich the modest
The human principle resents the superfluous And applauds the modest
Authenticity ennobles and exemplifies (Being) lowly and yet not easy to exceed The noble young one has results
144

15.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao 36.1: in flight, drag wing, fast, but go somewhere)
Authentic modesty in the noble young one Is useful in crossing great streams Promising
15.1x (The) authentic modesty (of) the noble young one: Humility (is) a means to self-mastery He appears to be nothing special. He does not look or speak like a noble, does not look or speak like a beggar. He might not be suspected of harboring one thought, much less a boat and big plans to cross the great stream. This might not be known even after he's gone. It is not that he has no light to spare, but that he has it invested, with no light to squander. Nearly invisible, yet not seeming mysterious, he keeps to himself and attracts no distractions or challenge, simply doing the work that needs being done and pacing himself for the journey ahead. Modesty here is his method, made to serve greater ambitions. Quiet competence and humble simplicity will take him from this shore to highest adventure. So is a big plan to cross the great stream then immodest? Yes, if he fails to make it. He will not know this until he's across.
15.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.2: sincerity precedes the reward in spring sacrifice)
Expressing modesty Persistence is promising
15.2x Expressing modesty, persistence (is) promising: The inner affections (are) found If you don't tell them you're modest, then how will they ever know? And since they will not read your mind, express your skills, your needs, your desires, your want of an opportunity and your worthiness to take it. An honest modesty, straight from the heart, can feel great about itself. Doors open for virtuous ones and good information can open those doors. Sometimes being appreciated will help both the cause and its outcomes. The cultivation of virtue is often a long and thankless task, so why not see some rewards here? Modesty is not self-effacement, nor shame in being imperfect. It might be announced, or even decreed, without inviting a fall. Outward signs and behavior are not disallowed. The wrongheaded sort of humility that berates itself in court is just a perverse form of vainglory. To silence modesty is to confuse the two.
145

15.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.3: restraint in display is suited to persistence)
Diligent modesty in the noble young one Gets results Promising
15.3x (The) diligent modesty (of) the noble young one: The myriads of people concur Industrial strength modesty. His dedication and competence are inspiring of awe, but he got this way by being modest and attending to what was real. He is good at what he does and he has no doubts about this. Now, as the work begins to see some rewards, people gather around with compliments and praise. But he sends them on errands and starts them on projects, too busy to dwell on the honors, and applies the energy saved by not doing what is not needed. Does this mean that the work is not done for reward? He must be concealing some happiness, or smiling a little inside. Maybe it means that the work is simply not done and greater enjoyment is already had in its doing. It's the same thing as not speaking out when your silence allows you to listen and learn: it's as far from done as from wisdom, but working on it still.
15.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness In Excess
(Fan Yao 62.4: not beyond greeting others, and heedfulness)
Nothing cannot be turned to advantage With candid authenticity
15.4x Nothing cannot be turned to advantage (With) candid authenticity: (This is) not against the rules If it is best not to err, is it then second best to err on caution's side? Or is it best to step forward with candor and boldness? If you step forward and tell it just like it is, might you not learn a bit sooner whether or not you were wrong? When the rabbit stops to consider himself, the hawk makes a mess of his plans, but when he cowers in fear of the hawk he starves. So rabbits who live to make more of their kind will hop along in the middle. The same applies here. Between a humble silence and all of the things you can say, a middle way will use a plus and a minus to better effect: speaking simply and true, to the point, to the king, to complete strangers. Modesty and candor are learning tools, on learning curves, taking little for granted, making few assumptions, but above all, asking questions and honoring others where due.
146

15.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
(Fan Yao 39.5: at a major impasse, companions appear)
No enrichment by way of these neighbors Worthwhile and useful to occupy and subjugate* Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
15.5x Worthwhile (and) useful to occupy (and) subjugate: To expedite without permission Some serious trouble has come and gone and your good for nothing neighbors just sat by, doing nothing to help. What is a modest and authentic sovereign to do here? What right might you have to step in and alter their ways? What foundation might you have to assume that you are superior, that you know what is best for the others? How could this conquest be modesty? To show them good taste by grabbing their hair and rubbing their faces into your own fine cooking? And do it all for the good of the conquered? Are not the criteria relative? You already know from recent events that these folks are not your true friends. To act on good information is not the same as to act on a presumption. Is it enough to know that you have waited this long and examined all these questions? Is it now time for them to learn who their friends are?
15.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness
(Fan Yao 52.6: authentic stillness is promising)
Expressing modesty Worthwhile and useful to mobilize the reserves To discipline home town and province
15.6x Expressive modesty: The goals (are) not yet achieved * An appropriate practice to mobilize the reserves To discipline home town (and) province Modesty gets big ideas and even a little ambition. Modesty takes command and it might even make a conquest. One need not be limp to be humble, or passive to be retiring, merely in earnest and honest. Modesty can express itself as often as any old rooster might do. Modesty can set armies marching as often as arrogance can, it can seize the reins of power as often as greed. The difference is due regard, and the good aim of good means to good ends. This means to begin with the failures and flaws all your own and the problems you have on the home front. Hypocrisy is immodest and it cannot lead by example. To conquer their own worst enemies is too much of a battle for most, so they must find their enemies elsewhere, or they fabricate some where none can be found. Fixing yourself is extremely ambitious.
147

15, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 10, Lu, Respectful Conduct qian gua (inverse): 16, Yu, Readiness jiao gua (reverse): 23, Bo, Decomposing hu gua (nuclear): 40, Jie, Release shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
15, Notes * 15.0 The rendering of qian as `humility' is misleading. This subject is better covered in Gua 62. This has little to do with the practice of self-effacement, which is more often than not inauthentic. Qian is to know things as they are, even if they are great. The Gua Ci and Yao C i are more emphatic about this than the Wings, which under Confucian influence might favor underestimation rather than the precise assessment that the Zhou Yi is recommending. * 15.X This means something entirely different from a more usual translation of "weighing things and making them equal." This "handicapping" would actually be to appraise things falsely. * 15.5 It was interstate propriety, if not unwritten law, to offer emergency relief to neighboring states in times of crisis. This refers to a neighboring state refusing to do so, probably looking for political advantage in the neighbor's misfortune.
15, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Chesed in Assiah * Tarot: Four of Pentacles * Astrology: Jupiter in Earth
15, Quotations * My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun; Coral is far more red than her lips' red ... I love to hear her speak, yet well I know That music hath a far more pleasing sound: I grant I never saw a goddess go; My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground ... --Shakespeare, Sonnet #130 * But if you could hide the world in the world, so that there was nowhere it could be removed, this would be the grand reality of the ever-enduring thing. --Zhuangzi * Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem. --William of Occam (Entities are not to be multiplied beyond necessity, a.k.a. Occam's Razor) * We refuse praise from a desire to be praised twice. --La Rochefoucauld * Great men are true men, the men in whom nature has succeeded. They are not extraordinary - they are in the true order. It is the other species of men who are not what they ought to be. --Henri-Frederic Amiel
148

GUA 16, YU4, READINESS
Binary 000 100 = 04; Kun below, Zhen above
16.X, Overall Image Thunder comes from the earth with energy Readiness The early sovereigns, accordingly,
composed music to celebrate merit Enthusiastically offering this to the highest divinity*
Earth stirs, awakens, speaks out. The young sprout breaks free, lives out its homage to ancestors, simply, by carrying on. The fetus begins first to learn of its world by kicking the walls of the womb. The feedforward gives feedback meaning. Existence presses forward and outward before it develops ideas, out of balance in forward and outward directions, living, then learning, then learning to learn, and finally learning to live. The humming beings gathered, to set forth their first kings, to conduct their new music. They sang songs of praise and gratitude, inviting their gods and ancestors, their futures and pasts, to be present, carrying on all night and getting carried away.
16.0, Readiness Worthwhile to establish delegates and mobilize the reserves
Masses in general, whether made up of people or stones, can seem very stubborn about getting carried away. But sometimes all this wants is a lead, or something to break down resistance. And then, when they go, they go wholly, with great inertia and power. Displace the right rock at the foot of the slope and the whole hill goes for a run. Just as matter and water are always ready to settle, or move down the hill, life is always ready to get up and go, to rise up and be more than it was. Any excuse for a party might do: life is a proactive force, and will turn procreative every chance it can take. Readiness is half of luck and wants only an opportunity. As an old force, much older than brains, it is sometimes hard to ensure that enthusiasms be always measured and rational. Energy joined with acceptance, movement made welcome, is power. But when a host is so moved it will want a tune and a beat to move to, and so human hosts want conductors and some lofty excuse for their being so inspired. The parts of a self are also a host. They too get elated when all of them go the same way, life affirmed, spirits high, the heart thumping cadence. But who will ask where?
149

16.M, Key Words Enthusiasm, eagerness, exuberance, willingness, zest, the joyful noise, inspiration Spontaneity, attunement, rhythms, consonance, synchrony; an optimum readiness Acting in a timely fashion; responsive movement; prepare, provide for, allow for Forwardness, predisposition, inclination, initiative, earnestness, encouragement Confidence, preparedness, contentment, satisfaction; using momentum and inertia Complacent, smug, self-indulgent; enthusiasm as Theos within, needing an outlet
16.G, From the Glossary yu4 (to) prepare, provide, allow, (get, make) ready, prearrange, anticipate, presume, make allowance(s), take precaution(s) (for); think beforehand; be happy, be content, rejoice (s, ed, ing); (a, the) preparation, preparedness, readiness, anticipation; willingness, cheerfulness, enthusiasm, contentment; complacency, smugness, indulgence, swinishness, surplus, surfeit; responsive action, easy movement; excursions back and forth; (to be) prepared (for), ready (for); alerted, cautious, careful; willing, content (to); comfortable, satisfied, at ease, happy (with); docile; idle, remiss; preliminary, provisional; already, previously, beforehand; elephantlike, slow, heavy, ponderous, deliberate, inertial; in advance, in preparation
16.T, Tuan Zhuan Readiness
Firmness resonates, and so the intentions (are) carried out Responsiveness using movement Readiness Readiness responds with movement Since heaven and earth (behave) like this How much more true (this is) (for) establishing delegates
(And) mobilizing the reserves! Heaven and earth behave with responsive movement
And so the sun and the moon never stray And the four seasons do not vary The wise ones make use of responsive movement (And) as a result, punishments (and) penalties (are) specific
And the people consent Readiness' meaningful timing (is) very important now!
150

16.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.1: shock, fear and alarm, then mirth and laughter)
Proclaiming readiness Disappointing
16.1x First six proclaims readiness: The resolve (is) exhausted (in) disappointment Life invented and held onto enthusiasm once it had proved its utility in setting things in motion. For a feeling to do this much it needed to feel great, even greater than the beings who felt it, and this meant to exaggerate things. But this feeling is finite, and not the object or point of its own exercise, and it is subject to damage. It needs first to grow, to be nurtured and learn as it grows. It needs to be supported somewhere. Crowing about it too soon will let it all go, and all one gets for the effort are frowns, scowls and other attentions of doubtful value. Ready to go is not needy, desperate or anxious to go. To be earnest is not to be manic: such excitement is not contagious. Patience awaits a response, even if only: Let's not encourage this one. Then begin again there. You don't get a rhythm with only one beat, or the melody in one note.
16.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.2: hunt takes three foxes, claim golden arrow)
Resolved in stone An unending day Persistence is promising
16.2x (This) day will not end, persistence (is) promising: Using the balance correctly What a day this has been - and will be! You know that something special is ready to be engraved in your memory, a story to tell your grandchildren. This could be a personal best, a new standard set, an epiphany, an invention, a moment of perfect beauty, a place or a thing never witnessed before, the stuff of a legend, then myth. And for those who could not be here today, a record engraved in stone, something not to be taken away. The rhythm and tune are just right, the balance is perfection. The path to your goal simply shines. The moment comes, finds you so perfectly ready and passes, leaving you in your glory. Now what? The peak experience lets you go and trails behind you. How ready are you for yesterday? Have you been there now and done that? Let the stone carry the day. Just don't carry that stone.
151

16.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness In Excess
(Fan Yao 62.3: never beyond defense, maybe attack from behind)
Wide-eyed readiness is regrettable The slow will have regrets
16.3x Wide-eyed readiness will have regrets: The position is not appropriate There is nothing wrong with getting inspired when looking up to heroes and idols. Most of the time there will be higher powers and purposes than those we make up ourselves. But when the spirit is thought to be up on the altar and not down deep in the heart, the values may get all turned around. Soon the warrior is led by his sword, the scribe is led by his stylus, and the poor puppeteer gets jerked all around by his dummies. Movement and motive come from within, but idols won't tell you when. Imagine you want to pursue higher learning and believe that the only way is to get yourself put into school. This way of getting things done looks much to externals and to others for orders. Try showing initiative here. And if you must move yourself by using inanimate objects, then take a long pole and prod yourself from behind.
16.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.4: tied up in a bag, no blame, no praise)
At the springs of readiness There is much to have and to gain Do not hesitate Companions are gathered as hair by a clasp
16.4x (At) the springs of readiness, (with) much to have (and) to gain: The aims (are) fully developed He stands up to rally the cheering host, with a great embrace for all whom he sees, drawing friends together as a comb gathers hair, sweeping them into one direction, and pinning them with and to common hope. When the timing is just right and the crowd is ready to make its music and dance, one little gesture will affirm all of life. All the conductor needs is a tiny little wand, then whole waves of readiness follow. Even down off the dais, and not in the ruler's place, a responsive timing and sense will rouse a people to movement. Who is at the center of things does not matter, but the circulation does, as the heart is not an organ for hoarding the body's best blood. Inspiration is breathing. Choice is most real at exactly the place where it has the least weight or inertia and the mind can move things around with simple yesses and noes.
152

16.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.5: convening assumes position, not the confidence)
Persistent affliction Chronic but not fatal
16.5x Six fifth's persistent affliction: Relying upon firmness * Chronic but not fatal The middle is not yet passed He lies down to welcome a cure. What can he want and be hoping for here? To keep company with the healers? They are such a spirited lot! What is it about our illness and suffering that leads us to spend so much time here? How is this an expression of proactive life? The healer will have many questions. Is it better to feel something than nothing? Do you keep a disease just to rally a struggle for life, knowing that the spirit and will are forces that heal? Are there guilt and penitence here? Investment in cherished wounds? Is this one mistaking a fever for fervor? Does he just need a rest, friends, or some pity? Has this become known, secure and familiar? Isn't a neutral condition about the best the afflicted can hope for? Why does the victim hang on so when it's best to forgive and let go? Should one of the shamans drum on his head?
16.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.6: advancing antlers, limit to one's home town)
Blind readiness Achieving while assuming setbacks Avoids errors
16.6x Blind readiness at the top: How could this be continued? The experience is over your head, with so much more power than you, bigger, higher than you could summit alone. You might think something rash and suspect a divine intervention, or think that you have met with the ultimate truth, or at least found the way to the top. You are born again now. Is it still too soon to ask where this new life will go, or has this one already been planned by others? Ecstasy is such a fine place to visit, with medicine or on foot. A sorcerer draws a circle and within this becomes the deity. But when he steps back outside, he is merely enriched by experience. The monk meets his maker at last, but forgets to ask the big questions. He can only flop around on the floor and then faint. Sometimes it is even good science to suspend the disbelief in a moment like this. It is still tragic when someone cannot make it back.
153

16, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 09, Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts qian gua (inverse): 15, Qian, Authenticity jiao gua (reverse): 24, Fu, Returning hu gua (nuclear): 39, Jian, Impasse shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
16, Notes * 16.T Shang Di, "the highest divinity," should not be translated "God," as many have done. Anthropomorphism was more common back in the Shang than in the Zhou. There is not a divine personality, purpose or plan in this Zhou tradition, only the sacred way that heaven and earth work together. There is certainly an intelligibility about this, but not necessarily an intelligence. True reverence, wonder and gratitude do not presuppose or require an object of worship, merely a true opening up to the divine nature. This construction, which is a literal translation, seemed to offer an expression useful also to the a-theistic or the non-theistic, and allows for the magic of the universe without necessarily personalizing any of it and dragging in conscious intent, divine plans and teleology.
16, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Kether in Atziluth * Tarot: Ace of Wands * Astrology: Saturn in Fire
16, Quotations * A sorcerer asks the question "If we're going to die with the totality of ourselves, why not, then, live with that totality?" --Castaneda, Tales of Power * Earnestness is the path of immortality, thoughtlessness is the path of death. Those who are in earnest do not die. Those who are thoughtless are as if dead already. --Buddha, The Dhammapada * The measure of an enthusiasm must be taken between interesting events. It is between bites that the lukewarm angler loses heart. --Edwin Way Teale * The tragedy of man is what dies inside himself while he still lives. --Albert Schweitzer * Without any intentional, fancy way of adjusting yourself, to express yourself as you are is the most important thing. --Shunryu Suzuki * Action springs not from thought, but from a readiness for responsibility. --Dietrich Bonhoffer
154

GUA 17, SUI2, FOLLOWING
Binary 100 110 = 38; Zhen below, Dui above
17.X, Overall Image Within the pool there is thunder Following The noble young one, accordingly, approaching nightfall,
Goes indoors for refreshment and relaxation
Movement under the surface. Times have their rhythms, their pulses and currents, their tuggings and tides, times to move forward, times to pull back, the drumming that speaks of the world's inclinations. Move to this natural rhythm and joy leads the way. A sage adapts gladly and follows his tastes: when hungry, he eats, when tired, he sleeps. Which direction will he take as his own? The one which finds the right place at just the right time. He may pause to ask for directions and allow the whole world to show him the way. Nothing is surrendered here. Following leaders or following prey, if he follows his own best interests, this will show him his way.
17.0, Following Most fulfilling Worthwhile to be dedicated Not a mistake
We truly misunderstand what pursuit of happiness means: it is happiness that does the pursuing and tells us when we are on the right track, while as prey it is nothing but trouble. There are right and wrong ways to follow, but not the way most think. Those who believe first and then follow have basic things confused. They follow the song and dance of another, thus half a step out of time. Or they follow promotional schemes. And confidence games. And the shepherd, fearing his censure. And the fisherman with his bait. All bait, in fact, is named happiness by the one who sets the trap. Now take a look at the king: as leader he's more of a servant than the one who washes his master's feet. Is he less of a king when he follows? He conquers at his best when obeying the natural law. He follows to know how time moves, submitting in order to rule, attending the world's rhythms, following hints and trails and clues, following up and through. The things which are greater than we are, but still outside of ourselves, can still show or teach us our own true paths. But we cannot follow nearly as well when grovelling down on our knees, or unable to question or think.
155

17.M, Key Words Quest, search, pursuit, seeking; incentives, attraction, allure, affinity, tugging, bait Draw, pull, persuasion, compliance; consequent, consequence; adapting as fitness To go along with, find the rhythm of, taking a pulse; follow up & follow through Allegiances, loyalties; subordinating, adherence, obedience, consent, submission Guidance, orientation; succeeding, succession; magnetic center, ethical compass Opportunism in taking guidance, advice & direction; follow as tracking & hunting 17.G, From the Glossary sui2 (to) follow (up, through); succeed, trail, go along, fall in with, wait on, comply, accord, let, allow, adopt, adapt, conform, respond (in, with, to); lag behind, accompany, imitate, look like, resemble, carry out, pursue, chase, go after, come after (s, ed, ing); (to be) followed by, successive, succeeding, consecutive, subsequent; pursued, chased; (a, the) consequence, succession, pursuit, company, success, response; obsequiousness; subsequently, afterward(s), next, then, at once, presently, instantly, forthwith, right behind, in due course, in the course of time, accordingly, according to 17.T, Tuan Zhuan Following
The firm comes forward and submits to the flexible Movement and satisfaction (in) following Great fulfillment, to be dedicated (is) not a mistake: And all under heaven follow the seasons Following the time has a meaning (of) great importance here!
156

17.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.1: being true is no end, take hand, do not worry)
Standards will change Persistence is promising Leaving the gate to interact has merit
17.1x Standards will change: To follow the true (is) promising * Leaving the gate to interact has merit: Nothing (is) lost Some believers believe that paradise is a walled-in garden of truth, a windowless monad, without any windows to let in bad news, or doors to admit any makers of mischief. They feel secluded, safe and secure behind the things that they are told. The news and the current events, the rhythm of the world outside the walls, are fogs and ephemera in the glare of eternal and unchanging truths. It may be true that the classics and standards change more slowly than fashion. Some laws might live for centuries, some dharmas, thousands of years. But even these adapt to new cultures and times. Who makes up these strange ideas, and why do people embrace them? What makes change so distasteful to insecure people? Why not tell them stories for grownups? Paradise is big and round. And you stand exposed on the outside.
17.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
(Fan Yao 58.2: trusting joy, promising, regrets pass)
Bound to the little child Giving up one of maturity
17.2x Bound to the little child: As opposed to joining (their) company He believes in and clings to the nice and the fun. Thus he guards his innocence and cultivates his childlike qualities in order to stay in a happier state. The elders have all been there and done that, so long ago, and sucked all the juices out. Now theirs is a dry, second-hand, grumpy thing. Rigorous thinking and knowhow frown too much for his taste. Wide-eyed, but short sighted, a deficit of attention will not let him think this all through. Distractions cannot track this thing to its end. And so he will live to discover, in difficult ways, as much incompetence in innocence as arrogance in age. There is a way to be both, and to have the best of both, but this lies on the far side of adulthood, which also will need outgrowing. Neither youth nor maturity need take as much time as allotted. But beginner's mind is the best place to start and return to.
157

17.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.3: when the talk has circled three times, be sure)
Bound to one of maturity Giving up the little child Following comes to be seeking of gain Worthwhile to abide in persistence
17.3x Bound to one of maturity: Intending to give up the lowly On the path we must take to maturity, the time comes to put away childish things, such as innocence, trust, enthusiasm and wonder. To cling to the time-tested elders means great expectations are served. Tomorrow will be set and known to the mind. We now follow answers instead of the quest. We accomplish our tasks without so many digressions, no questions asked. No wonder we get precisely what we seek. The larger decisions demand serious thought, although games may be played if in earnest for serious stakes. The elder follows a path, but to do this he must miss the field. While just off the side of the path, a little folly explores a bit over the edge, and sometimes finds the path to be a wrong rut. To follow is to ask questions and cherish the wisdom in being surprised. These are not lowly, or things to outgrow.
17.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
(Fan Yao 03.4: quest of marital suitor, going without doubt)
Following to achieve success Persistence has pitfalls Being truly on the path, Using clarity, Where is the error?
17.4x Following to achieve success: This means pitfalls * Being truly on the path, Clarity (is) the success Goal-oriented behavior has much to recommend it, along with some widely known problems. There is always this advice: be careful what you ask for. And: enjoy the journey as much as the destination. And: don't look so far ahead that you stumble on things at your feet. And: a confidence man looks for "enlightened" self-interest. Then there are the troubles known to the larger followings. When a group builds up its machinery around the pursuit of a goal and then the goal is attained, it begins to imagine a body and soul for itself. Having started out its life as a good idea, it now wants to live forever. So it starts giving orders and laying down rules to keep itself conserved: be it now resolved, against all change. All of these share a solution: keep all the goals, just make them ad hoc and provisional, and never stop looking around.
158

17.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.5: shock going and coming, but work to be done)
Trusting in excellence Promising
17.5x Trusting in excellence (is) promising: The position (is) correct (and) central If there are too many choices and not enough lifetime for every digression, maybe the best way to limit them is to set higher standards. Not higher ideals, but higher realities. Life is not tested or greatly advanced by the easy ordeals. Great strides are seldom taken in lockstep with others. We learn to swim best in cold water over our heads, when we are most alive to the living yet to be done. To face greater contexts and challenges will more likely cure us of snobbery than it will foster conceit. The superior man is a humbler man, in spite of all he has conquered. Selection brought this tribe far, but we may still want heirs who can walk more erect and think better than we, their primitive ancestors. Some will follow and seek, others track and find. To be the best that's within us, to get past ourselves, we need the unequal outcomes.
17.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua* 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.6: without pretense, but still suffering, no merit)
Seize and bind them Then follow, holding them fast The Sovereign* will offer a sacrifice at the Western Mountain
17.6x Seize (and) bind them: At the top (is) extremity The followers of a toppled tyrant are seized and bound and being taken to sacrifice. They were only following orders, doing as they were told. But now they are held to account for their actions, for their law-abiding crimes against humankind. The king will be on the high ground here, making some examples of the things not to follow. These will not be lambs or young goats; nor are they innocent victims. Where does one's innocence end and culpability begin? Can a conscience be required? There is a higher law and a justice to go with it. There are consequences to what we follow, or what we attach ourselves to. It is for us to step up and do the right thing, even in times that we are alone. We need not be told what truth is to be true. This is a part of what will finally stop war: people must learn to destroy or undo their own tyrants.
159

17, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 18, Gu, Detoxifying qian gua (inverse): 18, Gu, Detoxifying jiao gua (reverse): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage hu gua (nuclear): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
17, Notes * 17.6 This is word play on the zhi Gua ming, or resultant hexagram name, Wu Wang, Without Pretense. The Sovereign here is Wu Wang, founder of the Zhou, who conquered the tyrant Zhou Xin. The tyrant's closest followers, those holding positions of leadership, were beheaded in a sacrifice (see also 30.6), while the more innocent received new citizenship. There are consequences to Following wrongly, without conscience: Following does not give up duty or responsibility. The best Western parallel is the Nuremburg trial, where the defense was "I was only following orders."
17, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Briah of Atziluth * Tarot: Queen of Wands * Astrology: Sagittarius Ascending, Mutable Fire
17, Quotations * Believe nothing, no matter where you heard it or who said it, even if I have said it, unless it agrees with your own reason and your own common sense. --The Buddha (paraphrase) * It is forbidden to decry other sects; the true believer gives honor to whatever is in them that is worthy of honor. --Emperor Asoka, India * One requiteth a teacher badly who remaineth only a pupil. --Nietzsche, TSZ, 22-3 * People never bother to think that a doctrine might not accept them. --Idries Shah, Caravan of Dreams * He does not believe that does not live according to his belief. --Thomas Fuller * There are men, who, by their sympathetic attractions, carry nations with them, and lead the activity of the human race. --Emerson * This thing we tell of can never be found by seeking, yet only seekers find it. --Sufi saying * Be it remembered that we command nature, as it were, by obeying nature's laws. --Haliburton * You dangle a carrot in front of her nose and she goes wherever the carrot goes. --Aleister Crowley * If you ain't the lead dog, the scenery never changes. --Lewis Grizzard
160

GUA 18, GU3, DETOXIFYING
Binary 011 001 = 25; Xun below, Gen above
18.X, Overall Image At the base of the mountain is wind Detoxifying The noble young one, accordingly,
stirs up the people to fortify character
The wind is stopped and thrown back on itself. The root encounters a stone with no cracks. This is going nowhere. The wind cannot be captured alive, except with wings to keep it in motion. At the dam the water turns stagnant. Good food left in the bowl will rot. Even our thoughts start to stink when their thinkers stop asking questions. Some think that to fix things is to make them stay put. The young noble lets in a breath of fresh air, while the sage arouses his people to aerate their spirits, even when this calls for whimsy and pranks. Without innovation there is no creation, without fresh air, no combustion. Many nouns abound here, just not enough verbs.
18.0, Detoxifying Most fulfilling Worthwhile to cross the great stream Before the beginning, three days After the beginning, three days
Which side of the bridge do we sit on to ponder? Do we look three days upstream, to the melting snow and old rain? Or three days down, to the sea? The sage might sit on this bridge in the present, but even his shortest time's span might be seven days wide. He keeps his moments inside of their contexts and thus keeps his world on the run and alive. Breezes don't come in a box. Things die and grow rotten when pulled out of context. Then how do we fix this? How might we arrest this decay? Fix and arrest are the wrong things to do here. We have too much of containment, enough of things safe from the changes. The liberal idea will become an institution and soon it no longer responds to the needs it was made to serve. Its big job now is defending itself against any change but its growth. The good idea becomes a belief, soon threatened by other perspectives. The decaying civilization cannot permit the experiments with styles of life which are poised to replace it. Habits and dogmas, pathologies and neuroses, circle back on themselves like incestuous clans. The rot spreads. But this has its good points as well: there is much which ought to decay.
161

18.M, Key Words Fixations, toxic ideas, dogma, pathologies, bad medicine, ego, poison, venom, rot, Degeneration, deterioration, decay, suffocation, spoilage, corruption, resentment Righting wrongs, antidotes, reparation, restoration, renewal, fresh air; clear the air Revitalization, rejuvenation, redemption, stirring it up; purging, cleansing, curing Poor circulation, constipation, necrosis, atrophy, stuffiness, festering, decadence Stirring up, remedial action, corrective measures, flushing out the system, reform
18.G, From the Glossary gu3 (a, the) corruption, decay, decadence, rot, putrefaction, worms (in food or the belly), toxicity, poison, pestilence; bad medicine, bad magic, slow poison, venom; fixation (s), stagnation, deception, guile, delusion, insanity; (glossed in guwen as chong M1519: worms, insects, reptiles); (a, the) renewal, healing, curing, purging, detoxifying; [neurosis, toxic ideas, a closed mind] ; (to be) fixated, degenerating, deteriorating, decaying. This is a janus word, meaning both to be poisoned and to cure from poison.
18.T, Tuan Zhuan Detoxifying
The firm (is) above while the flexible (is) below Adaptive and yet motionless Fixations Detoxifying (is) most fulfilling: As all under heaven (is) healed Worthwhile to cross the great stream: (In) moving on there is work to do Before the beginning, three days, After the beginning, three days: In the end, in due order, there will be a beginning As heaven behaves
162

18.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.1: this will get harsh, worthwhile to quit)
Correcting father's fixations To be a young one examining Is not a mistake Difficult But in the end, promising
18.1x Correcting father's fixations: Intending to inherit the examined Along with the land and family's fortune, the legacies and traditions, the father's fixations will follow the line. The young one enters the work as a son, questioning what it means to inherit, and wondering just how far he might go saying no, thanks to some of this treasure. Does he really need all the loose ends and misdeeds? What should he do with those cognitive and behavioral problems? And what about those horrid ideas regarding religion and politics? How much of his limited time is best spent correcting his past? To stay stuck in this process rots a life too. What is tried over time is not thereby proven true. It will be good for the young one to learn how posterity feels: he can pass this new heirloom along to his own grandchildren. Three generations before the change and three after, he makes a great stream of his lineage.
18.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness
(Fan Yao 52.2: stilling those legs, not helpful in pursuits)
Correcting mother's fixations Ill-suited to firmness
18.2x Correcting mother's fixations: Find the middle path Has his mother let him go too far already? Certainly not from his own point of view. If mother had her way he would find a nice wife, and never cross any great streams. Neither will her love, so devoid of any conditions, allow her to see what her feelings can do to this boy. With less of unconditional love he might know more of himself, although accepting yourself as you are is not always the best thing to do. Whether he fails to live out his own life, or forsakes the family life he was born to, blame and guilt could plague him at either extreme. Even a path down the middle has problems if calling for too much compromise. What is a good son to do? The warrior's mom packs his lunch; the young monster gets mother's milk. You have to use your best judgment with love. Show her that nature and nurture will both produce in excess.
163

18.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience
(Fan Yao 04.3: useless to court woman losing self to wealth)
Correcting father's fixations There will be a little regret But no great mistakes
18.3x Correcting father's fixations: Eventually not a mistake Because I said so! just does not ring true for an answer. Father's belief in the right somehow seems wrong. Maybe not wrong enough to petition for better ancestors, but enough for a young one to want to sound out the family idols. Not old enough to be a good judge yet, not knowing the questions to ask, he still has an ear for the hollower sounds. He could tap these idols ever so lightly and learn all he needs to know, but when was a simple sufficiency ever the talent of youth? Thus he whacks them with a large stick. The legacy which remains is smaller, but a lot more sturdy. This is like sorting the inheritance early. Posterity has its duties and rights in both of time's major directions. Footsteps may track separate paths. One generation has no right to bind the next.* Each generation has an instinct and right to assert this.
18.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.4: cauldron's broken leg, spilling the duke's meal)
Indulging father's fixations To continue meets with disgrace
18.4x Indulging father's fixations: Continuing (is) less than gainful A lot of entrenched human error will get broad support from the culture around it. Families and groups may tolerate error as though this went with belonging, while the young get lots of advice to continue this trend and are pressed to accept these pathologies as if they were part of the meals. Wait until you are older, you'll see. Don't swim against the stream. You're breaking our hearts. What can one person accomplish? This is not how we raised you. Stay here where you belong and work within the system for change. All of the lemmings are doing it. There will always be places to place and hide blame, or to shelve your honor and hide from yourself. Humankind will never grow up in this way. A bending received in one's childhood is not an excuse worth a lifetime. Victims form a much larger class than innocents.
164

18.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.5: before reforming, three days, after, three days)
Correcting father's fixations Use praise
18.5x Correcting father using praise: Recognition for merit No child should feel obliged to inherit inferior things. The young heir takes a stand on behalf of posterity, wanting to be a good ancestor. This truly concerns the family business, which in the bigger picture is life, evolving on earth, and then the human place within that and the quality of its culture. And so he goes to work now on what has been spoiled in the law of his father, the decrees of his king and the discourse on faith by the family's priest. Given the scope of this work, the problems we have created, our wars, our pillage, our parasitism, the mess we are making of earth, are things to be outgrown, expressions of immaturity. Correction will be more effective if it is constructive. This will need a wizard, persuasive and tactful, citing the wrongs but building on rights. If the proposal is not rewarding, assume that it will not work.
18.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.6: blind ascent, advantage not relaxing the resolve)
Not serving sovereign or noble Of higher worth is one's service
18.6x Not serving sovereign (or) noble: The aim (is) a proper standard High up on the mountain's pass the wind is unrestrained. Steady winds of change, ever brisk and refreshing, are the commonplace thoughts up here. Let the climber remember, however, that most people spend no time here, so their wildest dreams are still bound by ancient rules and fears. This one follows no father, no king, no priest, but works on his own on what has been spoiled. His sights are set beyond, watching for children to come, and species still uninvented by life. How are king and noble to come to know these freeman scouts' worth? The men of conscience, the conscientious objectors, the satyagrahi, the ones holding true, are truly above the law and serving higher purposes. They may not come down from the hill bearing tablets, but they might bring a harder redemption and seeds for competing cultures.
165

18, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 17, Sui, Following qian gua (inverse): 17, Sui, Following jiao gua (reverse): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress hu gua (nuclear): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
18, Notes * 18.0 Gu is a janus word, meaning both toxins and the recovery from toxins. This was the origin of the character: to make Gu, the poison: put a snake, a scorpion, a spider, a lizard and a centipede together in a bowl. Then use the remains of the last survivor to make a slave, cause insanity or work evil (Young boys make this kind of concoction all the time). This is Bad Medicine: not fresh, not alive and not changing. * 18.3 The notion that one generation has no right to bind another is an idea that I first saw explored in the later writings of Thomas Jefferson.
18, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Assiah of Yetzirah * Tarot: Princess of Swords * Astrology: Caput Draconis in Air
18, Quotations * Ah, that ye would renounce all half-willing; and would decide for idleness as ye decide for action! Ah, that ye understood my word: "Do ye ever what thou wilt." But first be one who is able to will. Love ever thy neighbor as thou lovest thyself but first be one who can love himself. --Nietzsche, TSZ, #49 * Rough work, iconoclasm, but the only way to get at truth. --Oliver Wendall Holmes * Opinions have vested interests just as men have. --Samuel Butler * Science progresses one funeral at a time. --Max Planck (paraphrased) * The man who never alters his opinions is like standing water and breeds reptiles of the mind. --William Blake * In the practical use of our intellect, forgetting is as important as remembering. --William James * One way of looking at the history of the human group is that it has been a continuing struggle against the veneration of crap. Our intellectual history is a chronicle of the anguish and suffering of men who tried to help their contemporaries see that some part of their fondest beliefs were misconceptions, faulty assumptions, superstitions, and even outright lies. --Neil Postman and Charles Weingartner, Teaching as a Subversive Activity
166

GUA 19, LIN2, TAKING CHARGE
Binary 110 000 = 48; Dui below, Kun above
19.X, Overall Image Above the pool is earth Taking charge The noble young one, accordingly,
instructs and plans without exhaustion, Accepts and secures the people without drawing boundaries
The water table rises as the earth begins to thaw, the seeds grow damp and ready to open up. The sap is rising fast and the time to relax is quickly departing. Farmers are busy clearing and plowing their fields, laying the groundwork for summer and fall. Workers would be less inexhaustible were this not a seasonal thing, but they've had all winter to get themselves ready. Now needs have snuck up in a hurry and it's time to get dirty and muddy and sweaty. The nobles have set their teams into motion, according to plans made beforehand, resources rise up to meet the occasion. It is not the time to manage the workers in detail: they coordinate and delegate from above.
19.0, Taking charge The greatest fulfillment rewards persistence To arrive in the eighth month* would be unfortunate
If the best rewards persistence, wish for hard work instead of good luck. Aquifers rise, work wells up too, saturated with timeliness. The seed has had its long winter to sort out ideas for sprouting. As its day to get growing quickly approaches, any pause now has a purpose. Admiring the progress to date, so fit to the eighth month, is trouble in the twelfth. Overseers step back only to look for oversights. Could it be time to pause and admire the work, when no work is done yet? Actions should not be postponed. The farmer must stay a full step ahead of the vigorous weeds and stand in as wet nurse for clouds if the rains fail to come. Creative problem solving is not theoretical now, but intelligence on the run. Even to take a moment now means to look sideways for unseen solutions and trends, to find a way to put the world's inertia to work and even make what is missing do tasks. Old successes only mean things learned and useful now: one is that you don't know when the rains will come. Seed must be broadcast by then. The season's promise taken for granted is empty. The success of the spring will be known in the fall, that of the leap in the landing.
167

19.M, Key Words To manage, preside, conduct, oversee, supervise, allocate, deploy; due diligence Commitment, approach, engagement, assuming command, taking responsibility Accession, rising to the occasion, getting involved, going to work, undertaking Groundwork, prospect-us, preparation; ripe timing, moment at hand, imminence Warming up, intending to do, mapping out things to be done; rolling up sleeves Step up, gear up, tool up; implement, getting into position; on threshold, about to
19.G, From the Glossary lin2 (a, the) management, undertaking, oversight, responsibility, supervision, commitment, accession, prospect, project, prospectus; exalted approach; (to) supervise, oversee, manage, take command, take charge, commit (oneself), arrive, near, approach, go to, be about to, view from above, look down on, look in on, inspect, condescend to, favor (s, ed, ing); (to be) temporary, provisional, ad h oc, near to, about to, on the brink of, imminent, at hand; [rolling up sleeves, getting down and dirty]
19.T, Tuan Zhuan Taking charge
Firmness penetrates and so prevails Satisfaction along with acceptance
The firm (is) central (and) resonant Great fulfillment (is) due to correctness
(As is) heaven's course To arrive in the eighth month would be unfortunate:
Waning does not take long
168

19.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.1: setting out to codes, to deny order unfortunate)
United in commitment Persistence is promising
19.1x United commitment's persistence (is) promising: Intending to advance correctly The task ahead is enormous, but so are resources at hand. The scope is sufficient to make sense to gang up, organize forces and delegate tasks. This means making some new social group, an entity of sorts, but without any brains or a conscience. Responding to simple agreements to adapt their behavior and notions of good and right, members receive equipment and rations and booklets with rules and codes. The common resource and effort is pooled toward ends productive and righteous. The group has will and a purpose, notions useful as constructs, but these will have no living sentience, no sense, no self or mind of their own. Do not expect a smart group mind to coordinate the effort: this is only language. The one with the shovel is the real being here. When work is done, the group should disband for his sake.
19.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.2: content to return, promising)
United in commitment Promising Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
19.2x United commitment (is) promising (and) without doubt worthwhile:
Not yet accepting destiny Many hands make the work easy. Many minds give it some depth. Sometimes the groups will not want this, as many want all of their members to serve the collective endeavor and to have no thoughts of their own. But today's little gang knows better. This is not an alliance of cattle, nor a government from a great center, nor the hive with the huge, pregnant queen. They go side by side, with separate aims and choices, each with a vision of what lies ahead, unobstructed by leaders and plans. If they each have many options, than the many should have many more. Our causes make use of myths and ideas, but these tend to make foolish leaders. Groups should not try to be towers. They ought to be bushes, each branch with its seed. One doesn't sow a field of grain by planting the seeds in one hole. Diversity means strong and stable.
169

19.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.3: do not worry the certainties, sustain happiness)
Sweet commitment Not an orientation with merit Following concern about this Avoid errors
19.3x Sweet commitment: The position is not appropriate * Following concern about this: The errors will not be lasting While those around him get up and go, he squats on his thoughts of next season, already tasting the fruits of the labor he now postpones. To let ourselves be driven a little by thought of rewards at the end is not a bad or unusual thing. But if these provide all the force for the movement, then any disincentive will come at the worst of all possible times. Spring should be moving enough. But wanting only the good stuff for free, or wanting to be rewarded just for being you, is getting a little ahead of and full of ourselves. There are bitter and bittersweet lessons ahead - sour, salty and savory too. Why want to start with dessert? Life needs exuberant movement, or it will not even feed dreams. Some people pay to get exercised. You cannot just plod along, using up last year's health. Why not harvest some of this feeling now?
19.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.4: marriage delayed beyond term, late is timely)
Complete commitment Without mistakes
19.4x Complete commitment, without mistakes: The position (is) appropriate He is late in getting started, but this time was spent in good planning. Those who were watching him breathing and scratching his head now see him fall to the task with a consummate style, like a waterfall headed for ocean when the bottom drops out of the river. An artist takes what seems ages to center himself, even months in preparation, while ink and brush lie motionless. The paintings he makes might only take minutes, but they could bring enjoyment for centuries. Getting ready is part of the work. The time spent becoming not lazy, or not half-measured, or not frightened or not insecure is not. We could easily spend more time in approach than at work, covering the contingencies, getting the devil's opinion, overthinking things through. But these creations rarely show genius or spark. There comes a time to get messy.
170

19.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
(Fan Yao 60.5: sweet limitation, promising, merit to continue)
Informed commitment A great noble's necessity Opportune
19.5x A great noble has this necessity: Action in the center has this distinction A great prince may surround himself with helpers more skilled than he is. He may appoint one who is more skilled at ruling. He knows where he ends, when to stop and let others begin. This is no cause for shame. In fact it will give him great face, with a great grin across it, to be smart enough to pass on tedious work. Authority can be skeptical and criticize itself without getting caught in a doubter's paralysis, or confident and competent without getting caught up in terminal pride. The sage is not ashamed of being so finite and small: he will make his universe larger still, at every chance he can take. Humility is a great thing. It will keep the prince honest and hungry for good information, even if this data contains opposing views. What sort of leader does not want command of the truths? The center of power is there.
19.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.6: avoiding decrease increases, get help not family)
Authentic commitment Promising Nothing wrong
19.6x Authentic commitment has promise: The objective lies within At the height of his royal magnificence, the king moves in disguise, in old sandals, through the districts of workers and peasants, stepping around the broken pots and people, breathing the gasses of garbage and sewers, visiting hostels, asylums and prisons, to learn how life is beyond the edge of his world, outside of his illusions, but within his power to change. He lends the royal ear to the talk about the town, even getting an earful of talk about his rule. The greatest challenge for most is to go on pretending and to fend off all news to the contrary. The greatest challenge of all is to carry the true thing forward and help the people learn to be sovereigns as well. If his power derives from their consent, why not help this grow better and brighter? This task might not be finished by summer: this is long-term commitment.
171

19, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 33, Dun, Distancing qian gua (inverse): 20, Guan, Perspective (ref. to 8th month) jiao gua (reverse): 45, Cui, Collectedness hu gua (nuclear): 24, Fu, Returning shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 12th Moon (Jan)
19, Notes * 19.0 Lin is assigned to the 12th Month or Moon (roughly Jan), the time to roll the sleeves up and get ready to get dirty or undertake the new year. The 8th Moon refers to the Qian Gua, or Inverse Hexagram 20, Guan, Perspective, the time to step back and contemplate the summer's work, not to begin it. This reference, combined with the assignment of Gua 24, Fu, to the Winter Solstice (11th Moon, Dec.), indicates that something at least close to what are now called the Sovereign Gua was among the original Zhou Yi dimensions. See the Gua assignments to the Twelve Moons (Dimensions, Shi Er Di Zhi).
19, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Netzach in Assiah * Tarot: Seven of Pentacles * Astrology: Venus in Earth
19, Quotations * Try not. Do or do not. There is no try. --Master Yoda * Carpe diem. (Seize the day) --Horace * Opportunities multiply as they are seized. --Sunzi * We cannot put off living until we are ready. The most salient characteristic of life is its coerciveness; it is always urgent. --Ortega y Gasset * ... you must live in the world today as you wish everyone to live in the world to come. That can be your contribution. Otherwise, the world you want will never be formed. --Alice Walker, The Temple of My Familiar * The time will come when Winter will ask us `"What were you doing all Summer?" --Bohemian proverb * Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed people can change the world. Indeed it is the only thing that ever has. --Margaret Mead * You cannot build a reputation on what you are going to do. --Henry Ford * Whatever you do will be insignificant, but it is very important that you do it. --Gandhi
172

GUA 20, GUAN1, PERSPECTIVE
Binary 000 011 = 03; Kun below, Xun above
20.X, Overall Image The wind moves over the earth Perspective The early sovereigns, accordingly, examined the regions
And comprehended their societies To establish their doctrines
The wide-ranging wind blows over the earth, entering every valley and cave, every niche and crack, by adapting to fit its place. The right idea embraces the real, simply, but richly in detail. The founders set aside preconceptions, in order to learn before teaching, observing the local ways and activities from inside out first, getting insight before claiming overview, being sure to sow the right seeds for the soil. The doctrine would vary, adapting to meet the needs of each point of view and the culture. Towers to some are observatories; farther away they are landmarks. The proper view of the tower encompasses both, but at any one given time only one might be usefully true.
20.0, Perspective A cleansing but not a sacrifice Being true is as good as majestic
Full of hope and trust, the people look up to the tower, watching the one up high on the altar. Full of awe, the sage looks up at the stars, with the fires of heaven gathered in waiting, beholding and being beheld, and being beholden, knowing what must be the sacrifice. The master of ceremonies knows the perceptions and makes them the carriage for delivering meanings, meeting the expectations, yet somehow still getting the message across, giving them what they wanted to see, and yet telling them what had need to be told. Many degrees of comprehension are represented here and the work is with many perspectives. But there is only gain here, not much to sacrifice, except for the stuff that is washed from the eyes and the heart, and the junk that is cleared from the view and the path. Many differing points of view can be added up together. Some say that this is why there is life, and why we all stay so separate. Others of course might say that there should be no why. We see more depth in the world this way, more dimensions to our existence. There is a way to be true that does not rely upon knowing only one truth. It is not lost in some relativity either.
173

20.M, Key Words Observe, view, attend, study, contemplate, consider, examine; the examined life Investigation, reconnaissance, review, survey, learning, comprehension, compass (Changing) points of view, frames of mind, postulates, hypotheses, outlooks, ken Frames of reference, reframing; universes of discourse; suspending a (dis-)belief Overview, taking inventory, overall view, objectivity(-ification); reading the signs Understanding other perspectives, a point of view of being beheld or objectified
20.G, From the Glossary guan1 (to) attend, behold, comprehend, consider, contemplate, divine, evaluate, examine, gaze (at, upon), gaze with concentration, look (at/for/to), observe, perceive, see, study, view, watch, scry, regard (s, ed, ing); (a, the) comprehension, observation, perception, perspective, prospect, scenery, sight, view, vista
20.T, Tuan Zhuan The great perspective lies above
Acceptance and versatility Balance (and) uprightness (are) used in observing all under heaven Observing A cleansing but not a sacrifice, Being true is as good as dignified: Those below observe and so (are) transformed Observing heaven's sacred course and the four seasons' lack of deviation The wise ones use (these) sacred principles to establish (their) teachings And so all under heaven simply consent
174

20.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.1: worthwhile and productive to perform great deeds)
Childlike perspective For little people, no blame For the noble young one, an embarrassment
20.1x First six's childlike perspective (Is) the little one's path There is nothing really wrong with having the ears, eyes and mind of a child. Minds grow their best developing slowly. You do have the simplified view, plenty of colors on the surface of things and lots of details at random. You are sure of yourself and your place at the center of things and are ready to question at least. Magic still lives. Of course there is no penetration, no overall concert or harmony, no practical way to apply what you see to your life. You have a deficient span of attention from only a single perspective. Right now is the only time. Your mind alights on the surfaces, on dazzle and glamour and show. You cannot tell the innocent from the naive. Your mind still wants a critical mass of experience and ways to step out of itself. Those who grow up should still want to have all this at hand. Just not as their only option.
20.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.2: hurrying to what supports one, regrets pass)
A prying perspective Serves a young woman's persistence
20.2x (With) prying perspective, the young woman persists: But still invites condemnation Contemplating the rites through a crack in the doorway, the young lady watches her husband stepping solemnly up to the altar to begin the autumn rites. Yet all she can manage to think of is how his clothing looks and how she wants him home soon. If this is the limit of her domain and such a narrow, short-sighted perspective is all she requires or wants out of life, one ought not to ask her for more. As long as the effects of this are confined to her life, no great mistake or great anything. A princess will need a much broader range of perspectives. Such limited views keep her stuck in one place, with half truths and partial contexts, as less than a worthy witness. One degree of comprehension is not all that comprehensive. A single perspective is prey to misdirection and gossip. Gathering good intelligence is done outside of oneself.
175

20.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.3: advancing, but no return, eggs but no goslings)
Observing our own lives in advances and retreats
20.3x Observing our own lives (in) advances (and) retreats: Still not neglecting the path The examined life begins with rough drafts and revisions. Growing up is creation. Who are we really, and what do we want here? With backward looks at the trends in our lives we try to make art out of retrospect. But what sort of stuff are we truly made up of? Disjointed events and their consequences? Are we what we have done and not what we failed to do? Were we never what we never could do? Could we be now what we no longer do? We sort through the trends and tangled up threads, the clues, the moments of valor and doubt, the tests passed and failed, to fashion and test new directions, to wrap up the past in simpler meanings and bring these up into the present, informing our freedoms with what we have learned and explaining even the accidents with newer notions of purpose. Some might dare to look at net progress.
20.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 12: Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.4: higher purpose not a mistake, but not happiness)
Observing a country's splendors Worthwhile and useful to be guest to the sovereign
20.4x Observing a county's splendors: (Be) a worthy guest The best judge hears all of the sides, even extreme points of view. But dispassion and cold objectivity will seldom help him reach truth. Even when all sides are lying, he will get as close as he can to first hand and occupy these points of view, many miles in many shoes, many places in many hats, surveying all he can. The outsiders' perspectives have limits and so going native will have much to offer. A wide-ranging teacher pauses between the palaces to note how the masses live. Great advantage is offered to royal guests, and to students at the royal academy, while if and how far these wonderful benefits reach beyond the palace walls, only the outsider can know. But even with peasants starving outside, as a guest in the palace, he feasts. It must be this way, to get the undamaged view. The fair witness must come and go freely.
176

20.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.5: a line of fishes, and palace inhabitants' favor)
Observing our own lives The noble young one does no harm
20.5x Observing our own lives (Means) observing humanity Looking down from his tower, a young noble studies his life, reading the dreaded permanent record, trying to be objective, setting new goals and subjectives. With no magic mirror in which to examine himself, the world will be his witness, and so he can see himself there, in effects of his guidance upon the lives of his people. He has much to unlearn as well, pruning excesses and choosing what to lose. The object of public view is the last one relieved of the need for self-study, the one who rallies the optimists is often the last one to let go of doubts. He must come to know the human behaviors, trying not to see himself at the center. This means studying commoners, farmers, beggars, lawyers and crooks. This is not about what he thinks of himself. Letting this picture get big enough means losing some of his size and importance.
20.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
(Fan Yao 08.6: joining them with no priorities, unfortunate)
Observing others' lives The noble young one does no harm
20.6x Observing others' lives: The objective is still not objective Alone at the top of the tower, the young noble's picture grows ever larger. He tries to take it all in, with what the wind has to say, what the stars have to show, and what noble works his hands might do next. The vision must reach through time, to where we have been and where we are going. But this is not a big picture if it is measured in years. This is whole species getting invented and going extinct, mountains rising and getting ground down. Life is all of our lives and all of our relations, a full circle of different perspectives. Finding no great discouragement, but nothing to boast of either, with luck he will never be satisfied. The spirit wants reassessment as the body demands food and breath. Any conclusions? Maybe do as you would be done by, live and let live, pay your rent, count your blessings and leave a better world behind.
177

20, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 34, Da Zhuang, Big and Strong qian gua (inverse): 19, Lin, Taking Charge jiao gua (reverse): 46, Sheng, Advancement hu gua (nuclear): 23, Bo, Decomposing shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 8th Moon (Sept) 20, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Kether in Yetzirah * Tarot: Ace of Swords * Astrology: Saturn in Air 20, Quotations * He, however, who is intrusive with his eyes as a discerner, how can he ever see more of anything than its foreground? --Nietzsche, TSZ #45 * Yes, the Springs had need of you. Many a star was waiting for you to spy it. Many a wave would rise on the past toward you ... All this was a trust. But were you equal to it? Were you not always distracted by expectation, as though all this were announcing someone to love? --Rilke, 1st Duino Elegy * Men are more apt to be mistaken in their generalizations than in their particular observations. --Machiavelli * There must be the true man, and then there is the true knowledge. --Zhuangzi * ... for our complicated experiments have no longer anything to do with nature in her own right, but with nature charged and transformed by our own cognitive activity. --Werner Heisenberg * The most fatal illusion is the settled point of view. Since life is growth and motion, a fixed point of view kills anybody who has one. --Brooks Atkinson
178

GUA 21, SHI4 HE2, BITING THROUGH
Binary 100 101 = 37; Zhen below, Li above
21.X, Overall Image Thunder and lightning bite through The early sovereigns, accordingly,
clarified penalties when declaring the laws
White-hot, jagged teeth and then a big crunch, with no pause between them. Clarity first and then vigorous movement. The cause of the problems has ended and all of the nonsense is done. The founders made a few simple laws, defined them clearly, and announced what the punishments were for their trespass. Then, when the social trust was betrayed, justice was done in bronze and blood. Everybody was warned, so committing a crime was to clearly ask for the consequences. And then the whole process came due. But the laws were few and clear then and all of those crimes had victims. Someone could use a truth for defense and reason could play the advocate.
21.0, Biting Through Satisfaction Worthwhile to execute justice
The beast who reigns supreme in a land does not trouble himself with antagonists. He bites the one who makes trouble. A prince does not compete with gossips and traitors: he makes clear examples. This world already has too many people, and a hard enough time with trust. Then why not start cleaning up, right here and now? The ideal justice is seldom attained. The tangled mass of law is written by lawyers. Bad precedents in the courts are still precedents. Enforcement of the law is wildly inconsistent. Sometimes laws will make nearly everyone criminals, to give the state more control. The codes proliferate fruitlessly and rarely get pruned. Both sides of the dispute are argued by toothless advocates, with mouths full of mush, and each with less than half of the truth. It isn't really a wonder then that crime and confusion prevail, that justice lacks teeth and moral force bite. To the gamblers the odds must look pretty good. What stands most in need of some lightning and thunder today is this system. Its obstacles, obstructions, predicaments and dilemmas are part of its very nature. The answer is less law, not more, against force and fraud, with victims.
179

21.M, Key Words Gnaw, chew, bite + close together, shut noisily, clamp down; meta-level solutions Retributive justice, enforcement, force, execution, dispatch, severity, lex talionis Emphatic judgment; police action & power; legal recourse, punishment, sentence Cogency, credibility, teeth, bite, decisiveness, incisiveness, trenchancy; severance Instruments of justice, legal constraints, criminal law (dist Gua 06, civil disputes) Insufferable things; accountability, culpability; closure, finality, termination, ends 21.G, From the Glossary shi4 (to) bite (into, on), bite down on, bite off, eat, devour, gnaw, chew (on) (s, ed, ing) he2 (to be) through, together, closed, closing; (to) consolidate, bite, eat, chew, join the teeth; close, shut, unite, join (s, ed, ing); noisily, loudly, completely; as ke4: suddenly, promptly 21.T, Tuan Zhuan Between the jaws is an object
So this is called biting through Biting through and then satisfaction:
The firm (and) the flexible (are) evenly apportioned Action with clarity Thunder (and) lightning converge and make manifest The flexible gains the center and then acts above Although not properly situated (It is) worthwhile to execute justice
180

21.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.1: advance frustrated, wits for confidence, tolerate)
Sandaled feet, shackled in stocks, hiding the toes Not a mistake
21.1x Sandaled feet, shackled in stocks, hiding the toes: Not progressing Few have never been first time offenders, although many have never been caught. This is a first misdemeanor, a minor mistake, a nibble on that great poison cheese. The knowledge that one has been stupid is all the wisdom most need in order to move on. To take the education needs little remorse and less resentment or rancor. This punishment speaks to the crime: to own two feet is not the license to trespass, or tread too far astray, or stay on this recent path. One is not free to go there again or move in that way the next time. Deprived awhile of toes, one relearns the value of walking more freely about. Restraints are there to mimic restraint and hint that to control this yourself would be better. The little debt to society is easy to redeem: just limit the options. You don't shoot the dog until he brings home his third skunk.
21.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.2: meeting with the leader in the alley, not wrong)
Biting into tender meat, burying the nose No harm done
21.2x Biting (into) tender meat, burying the nose: Relying on firmness He has lived a stressful and strenuous life. His meat has always been fairly tough. While dining with high born, gentler folk he's taken too firm a bite. Meet the new marshal in town, with a nose that knows no art for the dainty, more for tracking the scents of the wild. This ever-so-delicate flesh is not a match for his usual chomp. His teeth bang loudly together and this makes the thin-skinned nibblers nervous. So much for doubting his place on the food chain. At least the bite has been bitten. But is he ready for too big a serving of justice, too poorly prepared to mete out some leniency, or too crude to comprehend fair mitigation? Does he mean to cut through the protocols thus? Will he beat some hapless jaywalker senseless? Who will teach whom a thing or two here? Maybe force and finesse can meet halfway, in firmness.
181

21.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
(Fan Yao 30.3: sun declines, no drums, songs: moans & laments)
Biting into preserved meat Encountering decay A little embarrassing But no blame
21.3x Encountering decay: The position is not appropriate Gnawing away at old, dried meat he bites into something gone bad. There will be some delay before he can execute justice, as he finds time unpleasantly stretched into long and unloveable moments, face first into the privy, with no way to save face, instill awe, gain credibility or set impressive examples. Things are more complex than first thought. The troubles he thought he could deal with quickly took some time to grow rotten, with underlying causes, hidden implications, toxic pathologies and clearly something festering. A sickening revelation. A revolting development. With roots down deep in the past, it is not easy to get this over and done with. Once he can get this out of his system and the bad taste out of his mouth, he will know to look for old problems, with deeper roots and causes long in need of correction.
21.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.4: tiger's search, staring, glaring, passion to hunt)
Biting on dry, bony meat Securing funding and arrows Warranting difficult persistence Promising
21.4x Rewarding difficult persistence (with) promise: Still an unknown Getting ready to execute justice, the enforcer takes nourishment seriously. Already well-fed for the showdown, he trains his bite for the worst, gnashing and grinding and crushing, he even chews up the bone. Friends are a little nervous, but are glad to be on his side of the problem, and show support by pledging their money and arrows. The fierceness and the extent of this trouble are not yet perfectly known. The tiger takes his turf seriously and rarely has cogency troubles, or doubts about his ability to get to the throat of a problem. His bite is well-known and no laughing matter. Events could grow brutal as hell soon, but by tomorrow's light things might not be as grim as expected. He might even frighten the problems away. But even one such as this could save some trouble by laying out traps and contingency plans.
182

21.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.5: afflictions, do not medicate to bring well-being)
Biting into dried meat Finding yellow metal Persistence is trouble Avoid mistakes
21.5x Persistence (is) trouble, avoid mistakes: Find the proper response While everyone here at the table might know that finding an arrowhead in your meat is good luck, it is not half as well known that not finding this item until it's too late is something less than lucky. You'll still play a part in your luck here. Sufficiency to the task is the perfect quantum of vigor. Not enough bite will not get the job done. If the strength of the bite is tempered and only just barely sufficient, then a treasure awaits your discovery. But if the jaws are too strong to play the more sensitive parts, you will use up your treasure in having your teeth rebuilt. There is much less good fortune in not being ready for the more unlikely events. So when you execute justice and someone says to really crack down, think twice. Half a bite might be the best portion. There are mitigating circumstances and things which might be redeemed.
21.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.6: shock and confusion, learn from neighborhood)
Wearing the cangue, hiding the ears Unfortunate
21.6x Wearing the cangue, hiding the ears: Quick to hear, (but) without clarity Now he stands before you, unable to scratch his ears, a monument to his ignorance. Hey, here's an omen. Having demonstrated his deafness to words of fair warning he may now be certified numb in the skull. It is not unusually cruel to punish this stupid, inferior head. That's where the trouble is, in the thinking that got him here. Perhaps even now he finds ways to blame his parents and village. Maybe he will try to explain how he just went out of his mind. No criminal acts against other people are sane. This describes crime: it is not an excuse to commit one. And the one who sets him free before he learns to own his misdeeds is now an accomplice and partner in crime, as bad as the one who makes the bad laws. One more offense and someone will cut off his ears: a visual aid to the code. It may still be that he can do nothing.
183

21, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 48, Jing, The Well qian gua (inverse): 22, Bi, Adornment jiao gua (reverse): 55, Feng, Abundance hu gua (nuclear): 39, Jian, Impasse shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
21, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Geburah in Atziluth * Tarot: Five of Wands * Astrology: Mars in Fire
21, Quotations * Alexander finding himself unable to untie the Gordian knot, the ends of which were secretly twisted round and folded up within it, cut it asunder with his sword. --Plutarch, Alexander * Arrakis teaches the attitude of the knife - chopping off what's incomplete and saying "Now it's complete because it's ended here." --Frank Herbert, Dune * Let the sword decide after the stratagem has failed. --Arabic proverb * My deeds upon my head! I crave the law. --Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice * Truth has rough flavors if we bite it through. --George Eliot * There are a thousand hacking at the branches of evil to one who is striking at the root. --Thoreau * The more corrupt the state the more numerous the laws. --Tacitus * I know no method to secure the repeal of bad, obnoxious, or unjust laws so effective as their strict execution. --Ulysses S. Grant * What you cannot enforce, do not command. --Sophocles
184

GUA 22, BI4, ADORNMENT
Binary 101 001 = 41; Li below, Gen above
22.X, Overall Image At the foot of the mountain is flame Adornment The noble young one, accordingly, clarifies numerous policies* But does not presume to execute justice
A glorious sight to the folks in the valley, but this glamorous light on the surface of things preempts and precludes the long vision. Only one side of this issue is lit, one only sees part of the surface. You see it with your own eyes; what pleases the eye is apparently true; how could appearances be deceiving? From this point of view, folks can be told nearly anything about the world beyond. Even the near is subject to tricks and plays of the light, the magician's stock in trade. This is not to negate the beautiful, or local information: most of cultural thought is raised in small spaces. But deeper issues and critical precedents want the broader and longer perspectives.
22.0, Adornment Satisfaction A little worthwhile to have somewhere to go
Beauty and grace for most are glamour and cultural finery: folks pause when their eyes are caught by the evident, or according to local custom, be this a grand illusion or a small illumination. Adornment will play with the forms of glamour and sham. It can also have some quantum of substance, as with the arts of a culture. To know the small and nearby is a great thing: nearsight is a big part of vision. Perhaps the best example is a goat on the side of a mountain, stepping with consummate style, advancing one well-reckoned step at a time, adding up small successes and taking great care in distinguishing this crag from that. This gets him slowly up to the top where the truly grand vistas await. It is his nearsight that allows him to do this. If he knows where he stands the whole world is at his feet. But humanity seems to want to light up a little and stop there, taking comfort in what it thinks is the known, lying in comforting ways. When ethnics transcend ethnocentrics, they still can't get past the anthropocentric. This may be a way of controlling the known, much like locking oneself in a box. Still, there is enough detail here to fill up the whole of a lifetime.
185

22.M, Key Words Dressing up, beautifying, decorating, embellishing; relation of form to content Elaboration, costumery, vanity, cosmetics, fashion, facade, veneer, posturing Refinement, style, grace, elegance, charm, class, etiquette, protocol, formality Nearsight, limited vision, myopia, glamour, fascination, sham, illusion, pomp Superficiality, public image, fancy surfaces; proximity's effect on apparent size Aesthetics, beauty way, highlighted substance; the cultural artifact as substance
22.G, From the Glossary bi4 (to) adorn, dress (up), beautify, embellish, decorate, make graceful (s, ed, ing) (to be) elegant, brilliant, ornate, fancy, dressed up, sumptuous; superficial, nearsighted; (a, the) adornment, ornamentation; shell, treasure; model (s)
22.T, Tuan Zhuan Adornment satisfies The flexible comes forward and refines the firm
Consequently, satisfaction Alternately, the firm rises upwards and refines the flexible Consequently, a little worthwhile to have somewhere to go (Even) heaven (has) a style Refinement (and) clarity mean stability (Such is) human culture Look to heaven's refinements Thereby to study the seasonal changes Look to humanity's refinements Thereby to transform (and) complete all under heaven
186

22.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness
(Fan Yao 52.1: still toes, no mistakes, prolonged persistence)
Adorning those feet Dismissing the carriage and walking
22.1x Dismissing the carriage and walking: On principle, declining to ride It will keep him up on his toes, so to speak, to search for the simpler life and make a more humble progress. Who should he try to impress? He walks a mile first in his own shoes, getting sure-footed and grounded. Remember when you were little and you finally got the shoes that almost walked for you, and suddenly you could jump twice as far? Pedestrian approach indeed! So what if the quicker things now pass you by? Heaven meets earth at this surface of things, this is how humble it is. This may contribute little towards getting somewhere, but there are other ways to measure advancement. You are free to stand on your own two feet, to step off of the beaten path, or rely on the footholds you've found. Racing by misses much. Terra firma can teach you as much through your feet as the sages teach through your ears.
22.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.2: the carriage is relieved of its axle mounts)
Adorning his beard
22.2x Adorning his beard: To partake in a higher prosperity He imposes upon his natural face, lending a grace to the beard on his chin, hacking away at prolific nature, hoping to uncover dignified form. The shears of the forces of civilization stand up against the old, wild ways. Is this the real you, or is this a mask? Is the genuine still in there somewhere, or does it fall to the floor? Is this like self-cultivation? Is he grooming himself for the good life? Will he now be invited to partake in superior pleasures? And if the shave won't make the man, you bet your beard when nothing can. In some cultures the men will wear nooses and leashes tied around their necks, but some claim this is only men missing their beards. Should we feign interest in social affairs so that others feign interest in us? Should we pity the man clothing makes? Society grows like a beard: dignity lies in there somewhere.
187

22.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.3: dismissing appetites, ten years not functional)
So elegant looking, as though dripping With enduring persistence, promising
22.3x (An) enduring persistence holds promise: In the end nobody mocks this He takes social graces as far as allowed, up in your face to get noticed. Glistening wet, almost dripping with grace: can he still be more than a drippy, frivolous fop? We think he can still be a man and be bubbly and oily, aesthete and affected, and keep his purple lace underwear. He may on occasion need to back up his choices, but this could help him build character. Gracious living, good fashion and charm are higher styles of life, and it's certainly good to be sensitive. But much in the mind does not like its shallowness mocked and something deep in the gut deeply resents all these elaborate surfaces. And what's the deal with plant genitalia? Flowers are there for bugs, so plants can have sex. How would you like it if you had the roots and they had the knives? The real beauty is not about beauty: it grows out of health.
22.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
(Fan Yao 30.4: so suddenly, what a blaze, an ending, a waste)
So elegant looking, as if of pure white A white steed, as if on wings Not an adversary but a marital suitor
22.4x Six fourth (is) properly positioned (But) doubted * Not an adversary (but) a marital suitor: In the end, no question He comes on with a dazzling grace here, clad in white, impeccably preened, just like a transcendent thought, on a winged horse, swift as the wind. The eyes need some time to adjust. There will of course be questions: what fuels these white-hot flames? The preacher might wear this same angel suit when leading his flock to the fleecing, the charlatan wears it too. All want something in the worst way, all are supposed to be lying like hell. Our fool really is different: he is in love and attempting to mate. He cannot help himself: he's so nuts because these are what drive him. The whole of nature bears testament to the good grace of the mating dance, all the feathers and flowers and fur. It also drives much of the human economy, even where you can't talk about it. This is what our fool flesh is heir to: life simply wants to grow larger.
188

22.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.5: sovereign draws near to family, do not worry)
Dressed up amidst hills and gardens One's gift bundle of silk is but a shabby remnant Embarrassing But in the end, promising
22.5x Six fifth has promise: There will be happiness He lives a simple and frugal life, with good to do, if not not well-to-do. Upper class life feels foreign. You can live in the ornaments. Rules are different above. He feels too clean and misplaced. He hasn't learned half of the gestures, but knows to take gasses outdoors. He knows the gift he brings is no treasure. He feels like a clown in these fine, borrowed clothes. Economy here means something entirely different. Appreciation as well. Poverty and simplicity are not the same thing, although they might share the same budget. He will not need to fake his humility. Life and style are not utterly meaningless here and the pleasantries make for some pleasantness. There is good and much work to be done here, which will find its way back down to the valley. He brings all he can up the hill, wrapped in this shabby silk offering.
22.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao 36.6: not light, darkness, rise to sky, fall to earth)
Plain white elegance No mistake
22.6x Plain white elegance is no mistake: The top attains the goal From down below in the valley the simple forms did not seem enough. From on top of it all the perspectives are different. Anything more than a simple, natural form just feels pretentious and silly. Simplicity too is a kind of a style. The white canvas hides all the colors of light, and so it contains all the paintings as well. Plainness is not just for hiding, as silence is not just for filling. Content does not need sham to be beauty: the highest sort of beauty hides barely inside the obvious, as the ordinary wipes off. Humanity's long fall from grace was said to occur near the time when nakedness turned into shame, when wearing the sky became wicked, when right and wrong was draped over the world, when too much extraneous surface was gathered. Fear for the boundary came along with the boundary. Trash doesn't belong up here on the peak.
189

22, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 47, Kun, Exhaustion qian gua (inverse): 21, Shi He, Biting Through jiao gua (reverse): 56, Lu, The Wanderer hu gua (nuclear): 40, Jie, Release shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
22, Notes * 22.X Numerous policies as civil administration, as distinct from criminal law, or Gua 21, the Inverse of 22.
22, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Ayin; Path between Malkuth and Yesod (Trad: Hd-Tp) * Tarot: The Devil (Nearsightedness) * Astrology: Tenth House, Cardinal Earth, Capricorn
22, Quotations * What use is your plaited hair, fool, and your raiment of goatskins. Within you is ravening and the outside you make clean. --Buddha, The Dhammapada * What kind of truth is this which is true on one side of the mountain and false on the other? --Michel de Montaigne * Every man takes the limits of his own field of vision for the limits of the world. --Schopenhauer * For the great majority of mankind are satisfied with appearances, as though they were realities and are more often influenced by the things that seem than by those that are. --Machiavelli * Half the work that is done in this world is to make things appear what they are not. --E. R. Beadle * It's a small world - but I'd hate to paint it. --Steven Wright * It is helpful to know the proper way to behave, so one can decide whether or not to be proper. --Gail Carson Levine * The trouble ain't that people are ignorant. It's that they know so much that ain't so. --Josh Billings * A man knows that his work is well-done when it has a beauty of form to it. But he does not add or leave out anything of substance just to make his work appear more beautiful. --Eyler Robert Coates, Sr.
190

GUA 23, BO1, DECOMPOSING
Binary 000 001 = 01; Kun below, Gen above
23.X, Overall Image The mountain depends on the earth Decomposing Superiors, accordingly, are generous to subordinates
Confirming their positions
The mountain towers over the earth. A mighty pile of stones indeed, but no threat to time's dominion. Compelled by long ages of erosion and gravity, its impressive stature is slowly surrendered for the sake of a broader base. Thus the wise will learn to minimize what they hoard, and to give generously to common and regular people who support them from below. Piles of wealth become talus and scree, or charity. Redistribution will happen, but this can be voluntary and sent to where it does the most good. Only a few can dwell at the top, but the least oppressive can stay there the longest. As life does with its seed, the best wealth to carry also weighs the least.
23.0, Decomposing Not worthwhile to have somewhere to go
Simply by definition, any endeavor or thing which isn't sustainable must some day cease to occur or exist. These things will tend to take care of themselves, with a little assist from gravity. Time in unknown quantities will even take care of social reform. To move in enduring ways, then, means allowing the heavy to fall, the old to die, the weak to be eaten and the low to fill up. To move with the time is to move along with least effort. Suppose you have an enemy with self-destructive behavior. Would you give him a reason to rally and fight for his life? It will not end at decay: when husks go seeds takes a turn. Lasting perfection is not more important to nature than death and rottenness are. Seeds do not sprout out of nice-looking fruit. So to not give up will mean giving downwards. In his tower high on the hill, the uppity one will try to sleep smugly, up on his bed of complacency. Had he passed a few of his excesses downward, the mob would not now be coming to get him, seeking to lay him low, hoping to catch this useless encumbrance napping. But it's only a bad situation for things as they are; it is good for things as they will be. Try going in that direction.
191

23.M, Key Words Curtail, abridge, cut back, trim excess, pare down, deprive, skin, strip, flay, ruin Ground, downgrade, stabilize, consolidate, broaden base, return to basics, reduce Deterioration, breakdown, overthrow, destabilization, deconstruction, insecurity Overripeness, dross rotting around a seed, nourishment from decay, germination Germaneness, essentials; pruning; concessions for sustainability, wide foundation Leaving what should be left, carrying on with less but with stability; lightening up 23.G, From the Glossary bo1 (to) curtail, (pare, cut, break) down, abridge, strip away, split, lay bare, expropriate, reduce, cut up, skin, peel, flay, deprive, ruin, break, pluck, degrade, scavenge, loot (s, ed, ing); (to be) decomposing, decadent, unsustainable, disintegrating, breaking down; deprived, stripped (of), ill-founded; (a, the) deconstruction, destruction, deterioration 23.T, Tuan Zhuan Decomposing
(Means) stripping away The flexible alters the firm Not worthwhile to have somewhere to go: The common people prevail Accept and stop here Look at the image The noble young one respects waning (and) waxing as surplus (and) want (And as) heaven's behavior
192

23.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.1: forsake spirit tortoise, look at me, hang mouth)
Depriving the bed of its legs To dismiss (such)* persistence is unfortunate
23.1x Depriving the bed of (its) legs: Thereby to cover up the lowly There are gnawing sounds in the dark, and slander afoot in the realm. For a while the intrigue goes unnoticed, but even the littlest rat bites add up. All that they want is a few small and simple concessions. Too many have been too hungry too long and thanks to this poor inspiration they have nothing better to do. The thought or the basis upon which he comforts himself is not a stable foundation. It is weak in the basics, with poor legs to stand on. The lowliest things should be the most firm; the heavier things are better stepped on than carried. Underestimating the problem is, in fact, the problem and believing conditions are stable will bring collapse even closer. Better to set the bed on the floor and hit bottom while still up above. Much cannot hide below the legless bed: no ghosts or assassins, no monsters or thieves.
23.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience
(Fan Yao 04.2: embrace inexperience, involve women, household)
Depriving the bed of distinction To dismiss (such)* persistence is unfortunate
23.2x Depriving the bed of (its) frame: Still not finding support His bed with its elegant frame sets him apart from the others. He is comforted by his thoughts of how very special he is. But now he climbs home for some rest at the end of the day and discovers his bed overturned, all of his loose change gone, and maybe some of his secrets as well. The warning is implied: he has carried too much weight to these heights and wrapped himself up in himself. This frame of reference, that gives him his sense of security, is less than reliable now. Now his boundaries and his identity are problems instead of solutions. This attitude upon which he rests comes under attack from below. To possess a good resting place, a comfort zone, or a cushion in the center of who you are, is a fine and peaceful thing. But defining this in terms of the envy of others is begging for sleepless nights and bad dreams.
193

23.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness
(Fan Yao 52.3: setting those restrictions, rigors choke the heart)
Curtailing itself is not a mistake
23.3x Curtailing itself is not a mistake: Let go of high (and) low There is a place in this world for that which would topple all towers, or overthrow sleepers and tyrants, destroying their plush, purple couches. Deep in the untouched forest, life is in balance with death, but not locked in combat: the new will grow out of the old, the quick will grow out of the rotten. Pruning, restraint and self-limitation all will serve healthy growth. But we still want to move with the time, as gravity will show patience with mountains, taking one stone a year, with only occasional drama. Nor should one try to pop a pimple too soon. When the process is hurried, lessons of value may not be learned well enough. But bet in the end on decay, of everything not acting like seed. Then the trick with letting things go is simply to shed the stuff that gets in the way of tomorrow, letting gravity do the work of hauling this all away.
23.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.4: advance like a rodent, persistence is dangerous)
Stripping the bed for its flesh Ominous
23.4x Stripping the bed for (its) flesh: Cutting close to disaster The natural consequence of unsustainable behavior is in extinction of that behavior. The sleeper awakens to very bad news. Many do not wish him well here and carry the weapons to prove it. There are even a few he thought were his friends, including his chief of security. They say he was given fair warning about being a greedy rat, but somehow he needed their envy. If reasons and pleas cannot pierce his covers, then maybe the knives and swords will. Even as too late as yesterday, his fortunes might have turned. To have given it all away back then was a bargain. Gravity has the force of a law: you can do many things inside its structure and even find ways to fly. But gravity now describes this one's plight, and soon there might be a grave to sleep in. This is cutting things far too closely: just hope this is merely prediction.
194

23.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.5: observing our own lives, a noble does no harm)
A stringline of fishes By way of the palace inhabitants' sponsorship* Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
23.5x By way of the palace inhabitants' sponsorship: An outcome with no complaints With an ugly breakdown of order in progress, the rebels march up to the wealthier parts of the town. Because our subject lives in a tower, and his tower sits high up on the hill, the rebels might think to take this one down too. So they march up the hill with their stones. But this one's servants have been treated well, and greet the rebels at the front door and invite them in for hot baths and refreshments, and wise stories told by His Lordship. Witnesses here attest to his character. The rebels straighten and dust off their clothes, and prepare for rational talk. An astronomer, philosopher and a noble: who'd have guessed it? He has done his best when he could have done only his most. The past catches up and it isn't so bad. They make him an honorary rebel. It is great to have friends in low places too. Someone went fishing with chum.
23.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.6: dragons war in wilds, bleeding indigo and golden)
The ripest fruit is not eaten* The noble young one gains ground As the common people tear down their own shacks*
23.6x The noble young one gains ground: The people (are) those who uphold (one) * (As) the common people tear down (their own) shacks: In the end not fit to be used The tree has been thoroughly shaken and picked, and gravity did its duty as well. The only fruit remaining is spared for its ripe old age, the fittest and best example, the one that none will begrudge. The one thought too green, too high or not worth the effort will find its way down to the soil. It's just how things will shake out, the most natural selection. The hasty are consumed. When decomposition goes this far things will soon work themselves out. The angry mob runs riot, and burns its own slum to the ground. The lord of the land gets his land back oddly unspoiled, made fertile again by the ashes. The rebellion burns itself out. This does not need to call itself justice. It is merely appropriate for unsustainable things to self-destruct now. The rot will only attack the weak, the worms get at the dead fruit, the seed is set free.
195

23, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 43, Guai, Decisiveness qian gua (inverse): 24, Fu, Returning jiao gua (reverse): 15, Qian, Authenticity hu gua (nuclear): 02, Kun, Accepting zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 08, 20, 03, 42 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 9th Moon (Oct)
23, Notes * 23.1,2 The addition of such points to an ambiguity: your persistence or theirs? * 23.5 This seems to be a lost historical reference to a popular uprising against abuse of class privilege. The noble family in question would have been spared a "toppling" specifically because of the proper way the subordinates in their employ had been treated. The Yi is of course advocating here for noblesse oblige , nobility's sense of obligation to the society which supports it. * 23.6 See Sappho, Fr. 105a. * 23.6 This is seen frequently in the modern era, in the looting and burning of a ghetto or slum by its own inhabitants, who seem to be heedless at the time that the greatest loss is their own. There is no other leader but rage, which, in its blindness, misses its object. A tantrum is not a revolution: the fruit falls on its own, once again into fertile soil. Those adapted to prosper will begin with the facts.
23, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Kether in Assiah * Tarot : Ace of Pentacles * Astrology: Saturn in Earth
23, Quotations * There are people who are followed all through their lives by a beggar to whom they have given nothing. --Karl Kraus * Et tu, Brute? --Julius Caesar * Concession comes with better grace and more salutary effect from superior power. --William Pitt * In history the way of annihilation is invariably prepared by inward degeneration, by decrease of life. Only then can a shock from outside put an end to the whole of it. --Jakob Burckhardt * Know ye the delight which rolleth stones into precipitous depths? Him whom ye cannot teach to fly, teach him then to fall faster. --Nietzsche, TSZ * You, making haste, haste on decay: not blameworthy / life is good be it stubbornly long or suddenly A mortal splendor: meteors are not needed less than mountains: shine, perishing republic. --Robinson Jeffers * Growth for the sake of growth is the ideology of the cancer cell. --Edward Abbey
196

GUA 24, FU4, RETURNING
Binary 100 000 = 32; Zhen below, Kun above
24.X, Overall Image Thunder dwells within the earth To return The early sovereigns, accordingly, on the day of winter solstice,
closed the frontier pass gates Merchants and travelers did not move about Rulers did not inspect the domains
The longest night at last ends in dawn, the great wheel again spins towards spring. Locked in winter's frost the frozen seed abides, a conception, but a long way from birth. Winter begins today, but the bottom of this cold lags six weeks behind, on the near side of hope for the best, and spring's promises kept. The change will not be abrupt, but trust in the wheel's direction suggests it is on an acceptable course. In such deep cold and dark night there is no wiser choice to make than for refuge and home: light and the fire go indoors as well. Why are these the high holy days? Why not spring in full blossom or glorious summer? Take a full winter to answer.
24.0, Returning Fulfillment Exit and enter without anxiety Companions arrive without fail Turning around and returning is the way The seventh day brings return Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
New life begins deep inside, in those places too near to know and too small to see. But the mind sometimes seems made to go out and about, to test and discard new truths and realities. Now and again the mind will need a reminding, a memory wants a remembering, the vision a revision, the cognition a recognition. We cannot face the new without a renewal. Out there and way out there are where we leave those things that we will not or cannot bring home. The best and most realistic of all long-term goals is a home, and the longest-term home of them all is the earth. Of every being and thing that has ever existed, one thing can surely be said: this was only a phase that some of this world went through, although sometimes again and again. When nearly the same things happen again and again, then and there we find our reasons to hope. Seven days out of line? No matter, never mind, to and fro will go the way, here we go and come again, right back to where we belong. And this does not mean we must live there all of the time, any more than needing to sleep means sleeping all of the time. But is this not a high, holy thing to spend some time where we belong?
197

24.M, Key Words Coming back, coming home, coming around, beginning anew; to resume, retrace Re-; Restoration, restitution, redintegration, renewal, reunion, recovery, resilience Natural processes, cycles, the inevitability of cycles, recycling; renewed promise Pivotal point, still point, turning point, axis of the world, winter solstice, rebirth Core truths surviving digression, reconstitution, rededicated efforts, revitalization More coming around than turning back, 361 degrees instead of 180 degrees (Fan)
24.G, From the Glossary fu4 (to) devolve, recover, recur, redo, renew, recommence, recall, repay, reply, repeat, restore, resume, retrace, return, revert, revise, revive, (come, go, turn) around, back, home (to); fall back (on); overturn, turn over (s, ed, ing); (a, the) answer, recovery, recurrence, renewal, reply, response, return; (to be) in answer, reply, response, return (to); recurring, recurrent; again, repeatedly; coming and going
24.T, Tuan Zhuan Returning (means) fulfillment:
The firm comes back around Energetic, and using acceptance to proceed
So it is that exiting (and) entering (are) without anxiety (And) companions arrive without fail Turning around (and) returning (is) the way, The seventh day brings return: (As) heaven behaves Worthwhile to have somewhere to go: Firmness prevails (In) returning one sees the heart of heaven (and) earth!
198

24.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.1: walking on frost, hardened ice is the outcome)
Not far to return Nothing worthy of regret Most promising
24.1x Nothing distant in this return: The way to refine (a) life Even the greatest or truest of paths must be thought to include some of these smaller digressions and trips aside. Being oneself is being true to one's nature, and nobody experiments quite like nature. Life is for learning. The straight and narrow directions are heedless of most of this world. The most respectable man in the world should be permitted, if it is his choice, to enjoy women's toes a little too much. It's these little flaws in the art of our lives that let evil spirits out. Life needs to explore its options and this can't always be done only inside of the mind. Stepping off the side of the path to have a good look around, or simply to relieve yourself, is not a great mistake. The shortest distance between two points is the distance traveled in fact: it isn't the one in the plan. The guilt of one who fears to stray will make of his path a deep rut.
24.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.2: united in commitment, promising in every way)
Content to return Promising
24.2x Contentment in return holds promise: Through lowly compassion He goes out a little bit further this time, coming home seven days later, back to the fold, and maybe a fatted calf, with something new to ponder, a little wiser, a bit more humble. Exposure to the new lets him bring some of this home, to share with family and friends, to compare it with what is thought right, here on this side of the stream. Going as scout and diplomat for friends and the tribe he returns to will mean that he belongs here still. And this part is important: the decision made to do this exploring for those you leave at home can be made backwards in time, especially if one is able to turn error around into wisdom. When measuring a direction from self, instead of from a path, all straying is done in forward directions, not sideways. Turning around to go back home is also a forward progress. But sometimes this is uphill both ways.
199

24.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao 36.3: hunt captures great leader, no call for haste)
Repeated returns Difficulty But no blame
24.3x Repeated return has (its) difficulties: Deserving no blame He comes home to rest from a hard day's work, but he will return tomorrow, only to do it all over again. What he does during the day falls apart a little less completely each night, so there may be an end in sight. And every seventh day he can rest and recover a little. This wheel of toil and trouble is supposed to turn towards a brighter tomorrow, although most are dragged in circles until they drop in the dust. So what is the difference which leads to no error or blame? They say that it is insane to do the same thing over and over and keep expecting different results. The right thing to do then is to get some different results, with wise investment at home, learning to do more with less and getting back to the basics. It is not a resignation to this way of life. But any truly great work will keep one coming back, just like petty tasks will.
24.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.4: the shock is followed by muddledness)
Walking in the middle, all alone in return
24.4x Walking in the middle, all alone in return: In order to follow the path He thought he might find his way with this group, but little of what he learns here will be a part of his whole life's path. It was somebody else's journey. Things did remain to be learned before they could be brought home. Perhaps in a week on the road all he will gain is one memory, the odd look on somebody's face, or a clever thing to say the next time, or a bit of assertion to groan about later. To his private context he takes what little he needs, but a little is plenty if what he returns with is seed. So this all came as a big surprise, just when he thought it was going so well. The road taught him this: it goes two directions at once, each with ups and downs. The path of a higher purpose is only half as crowded, even if it is twice as lonely. But suppose that he'd learned this nearer the end, and had twice as far to go back.
200

24.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
(Fan Yao 03.5: collecting one's riches, persist in right amount)
Honest return With no regrets
24.5x Honest return, with no regrets: Concentrating in order to examine oneself This time he went way too far out. The path went on forward, yet he came back, and will not do things that way again. To stay your own best friend after a misadventure like this needs more than forgiveness, but to whip yourself for acting the fool is to play the fool twice. So he had a rough time, made a mistake, believed wrong things, drank and turned into a jerk, got angry and lost a few friends. We need to turn our regrets into lessons. Honesty stings, but the toxins dishonesty swallows will kill us. A straightforward, critical inventory is the shortest way back home, less loops than shame or guilt or repentance. Good judgment might pronounce some atonements, but it takes the best lessons forward: ahead is work to be done, a smarter life to be lived and consequences to own. Why live out our years in memory of our regrets?
24.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua* 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.6: at the source of appetite, brutal but promising)
Lost return Ominous There will be calamity and grave errors If trying to advance the military In the end there will be a major defeat Reaching one's domain and its nobility with misfortune Even after ten years, no ability to campaign*
24.6x Lost return comes to misfortune: The opposite of a noble course He gets hooked on his highest hope, like a fish gets hooked on bait, gobbles it up and swallows it whole and is dragged beyond any hope of a timely return, into the jaws of his destiny. The arrogant general can't see the long winter that lies beyond the solstice. He marches northward, overstretching his supply lines, underestimating the natives, overextending the resources and losing all sight of home. How could there be a return, crossing burned bridges and pawing the scorched earth for grain? Trapped where he cannot survive it must end. Too much belief in the self and its one way purpose. If he does now have the wit to survive, there are still ten years worth of damage. The lotus is cut from its roots in the mud, as the spirit is cut from the flesh, all for the greater glory, but only to wither and die. Here there will be no redemption.
201

24, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 44, Gou, Dissipation qian gua (inverse): 23, Bo, Decomposing jiao gua (reverse): 16, Yu, Readiness hu gua (nuclear): 02, Kun, Accepting zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 07, 04, 19, 41 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 11th Moon (Dec)
24, Notes * 24.6 For modern examples, see either Napoleon's winter invasion of Moscow or Hitler's reprise of the same stupidity. The zhi G ua, Yi, 27, Hungry Mouth, suggests that it is blind appetite which is here overriding the sense of one's way back and causing inattention to supply lines. Were the symbols of this Gua more aquatic, the authors might have used an image of a big-mouthed fish being caught hopelessly on a hook, never to return to the water except by a long, wrong route through the food chain.
24, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Geburah in Assiah * Tarot: Five of Pentacles * Astrology: Mars in Earth
24, Quotations * All these tidal gatherings, growth and decay, Shining and darkening, are forever Renewed, and the whole cycle impenitently Revolves, and all the past is future. --Robinson Jeffers * Remain true to the earth, my brethren, with the power of your virtue ... Lead, like me, the flown away virtue back to the earth - yea, back to the body and life ... Physician, heal thyself! Then wilt thou also heal thy patient. Let it be his best cure to see with his eyes him who maketh himself whole. --Nietzsche, TSZ [Luke 4:23] * Bao Jiao vaunted his conduct and condemned the world, but he suicided with his arms around a tree. --Zhuangzi * Every beginning is a consequence - every beginning ends something. --Paul Valery * The mind ought sometimes to be diverted that it may return the better to thinking. --Phaedrus * Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam, Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home. --John Howard Payne
202

GUA 25, WU2 WANG4, WITHOUT PRETENSE
Binary 100 111 = 39; Zhen below, Qian above
25.X, Overall Image Beneath the sky moves thunder The creatures interact without pretensions The early sovereigns, accordingly, flourished according to season
And nurtured the myriad beings
Heaven has given all of its orders: they come with each being. This being, in turn, is what life has learned so far: to live and learn more, to add new perspectives and tricks. Ancient heaven and eons of seasons are at work in the natural mind. Life true to nature is the seed of heaven, its blessing to go forward, wild and noble, informed by its inner wisdom and what it can learn on the way. Most of the wisdom heaven might teach is built right into young sprouts, the rest being clockworks and natural law. We begin with heaven's best guesses at how things might average out, a head start with promise, but not guarantees, not good and innocent, not sinful or fallen.
25.0, Without Pretense Most fulfilling Worthwhile to persist For one without integrity there will be suffering* And not much reward in having somewhere to go
By right of birth comes the will and the sense to reach out for a good life. Youth errs and stumbles, but as with young bones, first roots and green branches, the shock of having to learn will be absorbed in the bending. The importance of living is its own affirmation, with heaven's permissive assent; senseless living is also permitted, for those who may choose denial. Being true to the gifts one is born with, living a life of sincerity and integrity, is not any guarantee against bad luck and ugly surprises. Even truth is not always success. But life has learned that these traits will improve the odds, that working with a natural merit and practicing a natural good can be two of the best rules of thumb one can live by. And so one's inner being might already know what it means to be true. And life has also learned that living an insincere life, full of contrivance and guile, with parts of yourself at odds with your nature, will tend to diminish a life, or cost too much precious time in defending illusions and errors. Innocence might not have all things thought through, but thought is not all. The pilgrim who still seeks his heaven has looked everywhere but at his own feet.
203

25.M, Key Words Lacking, avoiding, no + presumption, pretension, recklessness, falseness, delusion Artlessness, guilelessness; naturalness, simplicity, sincerity, a natural intelligence Natural gifts, instinctive goodness, spontaneity, integrity, innocence, inner voices Pure motives, openness, surprise, wonder, original mind, faith in innate goodness Credulity, vulnerability, susceptibility, accessibility; good faith; the noble savage Presumption of innocence, benefit of doubt; issues of confidence, trust & honesty
25.G, From the Glossary wu2 (to be, being, is, am, are, will be, exists, remains) (has, have, had, having, with) (do, does, did) (there is/are/will be) (it/this/these is/are) no, not, nothing, never, rarely, seldom, no longer, without, with no; but (no, not); there, this, these (is, are) no, not, nothing (of); not (a, the); (to be) absent, gone, non-existent; destitute, wanting, in vain; lacking in; free of/from; avoided, devoid, void, deprived, regardless, instead (of), rather than, despite; not much, no longer; not being; (the) least, minimum, (so, very) little; no matter; no ... done; neither ... nor, whether ... or not, without ... or; (to) (simply) lack, want; avoid, escape; not have, own/possess/ have no/less/fewer; find/leave/use no; do no, not do, do nothing to (s, -ed, -ing); (will, would) not (be); do(es) not exist; were there no; has/have gone off; will/ would not be(come); (a, the) absence/lack/want of, avoidance of; nothing, emptiness, non-being/existence, no-thing-ness; un-, ill-, im-, in-, dis-, de-, non-; -less; don't, do not; used for Wu2, M7180, GSR103i wang4 (a, the) presumption, pretense, expectation, falseness, duplicity, pretext, guile, deceit, folly, error, disorder, disarray, distraction, extravagance, distortion; (to be) irregular, incoherent, presumptuous, pretentious, full of oneself, false, erroneous, vain, futile, ignorant, fanciful, duplicitous, wild, empty, void, reckless, entangled, idle, incorrigible, absurd, stupid, wanton, foolish, disorderly, untrue, embroiled, entangled; falsely, wrongly, foolishly, wantonly; (to) look toward, expect, hope; assume, presume, pretend (s, ed, ing)
25.T, Tuan Zhuan Without pretense
Firmness comes from without and becomes master on the inside Movement with lasting vigor The firm (is) central and resonant Great fulfillment (is) according to integrity Heaven's higher law For one without integrity there will be suffering (And) not (much) reward in having somewhere to go (While) without pretense there is forward progress How is this so? Heaven's higher law is not protection: (It is) movement itself!
204

25.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 12: Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.1: pulling up grass roots, with another cluster)
With no pretense, to go forward is promising
25.1x Without pretense comes to advance: Attaining the purpose With no help from mind's prior knowledge, an inner sense says to keep moving. A fetus does not know where it's going when it first kicks the wall of the womb. It is doing this to learn about legs. Life's first order of business is living to learn. Feedforward leads to feedback and this will feed the mind what it needs. Even the young of cattle and sheep can frolic and play and seem as if they had minds. Life pushes forward: the glorified mind is only one of its instruments, and has no more value or worth than the ways life can put it to work. Most confuse such innocence with ignorance, look upon wildness as a thing best outgrown, but life has had time to put its science together and knows that on average it's better to explore than to stay put or hide. The promise here is of learning ahead, not guarantees of success.
25.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao 10.2: treading level, easy path, obscure one persists)
When not plowing to harvest And not breaking new ground for established fields Then it is worthwhile to have somewhere to go
25.2x Not plowing to harvest: No riches yet It is a folly of thinking to think that life in the present is confinement to life in the present. From its center here it reaches both forward and back. No garden would ever come to pass if no kind of forethought were thought, or if no kind of vision was seen and combined with tips from gardeners past. But the bulk of the work is done in the middle of these. We do not reap the harvest while plowing, nor do we dine on the third year's crop while planting the first year's seeds. We might trick ourselves into thinking that back pain or blisters are somehow their own reward. We trick our children in school, so that reading and math seem relevant many years ahead of time. These tricks may be better than expectations, which cost us our presence of mind, but best is to honor the need and just do it. Nothing passes the time like enjoyment.
205

25.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.3: caching weapons, climbing hills, 3 years without)
One without pretense still has misfortunes Sometimes tying one's ox Means the drifter's gain And the townsfolk's disaster
25.3x The drifters' gaining the ox (Is) the townsfolk's disaster That bad things can happen to good people is the source of much wrong-headed, paranoid thinking. Accidents happen, and things not deserved. The ox which was tethered by some innocent farmer is the drifter's gain, against a great loss of trust. Wisdom is built using tough knowledge too, and living to learn must also learn this. Undeserved ill fortune might squat on anyone's head. To account for its presence, many of life's extra meanings were conjured up out of thin air. Professionals will divine from its droppings, and pretend to know its next stop. But while this thing squats on the innocent bystander, things far from the truth will be thought, things not to the point will be said. Thus does the burden of proof fall upon the accuser, and the accused enjoys a presumption of innocence and the benefit of the doubts.
25.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.4: advise prince to follow, then perform reliably)
May there be loyalty Not a mistake
25.4x Prescribing loyalty is not a mistake: Certainly presume this! Some things must be presumed for the sake of our own mental health. Trust is one such presumption, and also an unending source of life's lessons. Mostly we'll learn in the end to lower our expectations too far. The fortunate ones expect others to be on the kind and ethical side of the average, or expect to turn losses to lessons, and set aside a dumping place for all those disappointments, somewhere out of the way. But what of being worthy of trust, and of learning and unlearning to trust ourselves? We seem born with most of an ethic, a hunger to find what remains to complete it, and maybe even a conscience. Our ethics are tied to self-interest, and opportunism by birth. So why not begin with things as they are? Life offers lessons in the order they need to be learned. To want guarantees is not innocent. Simply promise wisely.
206

25.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao 21.5: biting into dried meat, finding yellow metal)
One without pretense still has afflictions Do not medicate to bring about well-being
25.5x Lack of pretense itself (is) medicine (This) does not call for experiments The body is trying to say something, the brain has no final words yet. A disease is the start of an adaptation to the stresses along life's way, stresses often developed when the mind takes us far from our paths. Its favorite roots of guilt or fatigue or shame or self-indulgence are sunk into places that mind refuses to heed and keep clean, where ego refuses to know spirit's sources, or abstract thoughts get lodged in the flesh to fester: foreign conditions to feed foreign forms. The illness which has no such roots will tend to run a shorter course. An innocent following feelings might wander into a dark place like this. A healer or an empath might take on the illness of others. Let these be. Roots that feed an illness require a will to have one and a lot of work to develop. The healer's best cure will be a bath in water and light.
25.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.6: seize and bind them, sovereign offers sacrifice)
Without pretensions, yet advance brings suffering This is not a direction with merit
25.6x Without pretense's behavior: Going too far leads to crisis Flawless adventure was never a part of the promise: it was not that kind of promise. To be without pretensions might mean falling prey to crafty surprises, or falling in with the wrong crowd, or falling to the unseen forces. Sincerity is no guarantee that uprightness will lead to success, or that right action will lead to good fortune. That kind of promise smells more like bait. Success is not one's reward for being sincere or true. In being true and sincere, one simply looks for good signs to act or not act. And with this being more like a process than a single moment in time, minds and directions can change. Innocence is a way to learn and unlearn, not an instrument to make things work or to set the world straight. Even when you are righteous, or even merely right, the guardians and protectors of justice just do not answer to you.
207

25, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 46, Sheng, Advancement qian gua (inverse): 26, Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts jiao gua (reverse): 34, Da Zhuang, Big and Strong hu gua (nuclear): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
25, Notes: * 25.0 As it is pointed out in several ways in several lines to follow, the converse of this is not true: to live one's life with integrity does not guarantee success. Things happen without reason or purpose, although many reasons are made up in retrospect. But a life lived simply to learn is superior to a life of pretending to know.
25, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Geburah in Yetzirah * Tarot: Five of Swords * Astrology: Mars in Air
25, Quotations * Perfect sincerity offers no guarantee. --Zhuangzi * In the beginner's mind there are many possibilities. In the expert's mind there are few. --Shunryu Suzuki * An honest man is always a child. --Martial * A man is not to aim at innocence, any more than he is to aim at hair; but he is to keep it. --Emerson * I am too much a skeptic to deny the possibility of anything. --T. H. Huxley * The qualities we have do not make us so ridiculous as those which we affect. --La Rochefoucauld * "Thou mayest have deceived subtler ones than I," said Zarathustra sternly, "I am not on my guard against deceivers; I have to be without precaution. So willeth my lot." --Nietzsche, TSZ #65 * Seek simplicity and distrust it. --A. N. Whitehead * Life can only be understood backwards, but it must be lived forwards. --Soren Kierkegaard * Still the odds fall sweet in favor to an open heart. --Ferron
208

GUA 26, DA4 CHU4, RAISING GREAT BEASTS
Binary 111 001 = 57; Qian below, Gen above
26.X, Overall Image Heaven dwells in the midst of the mountain Raising great beasts The noble young one makes use of large stores of knowledge
of prior ideas and past deeds With which to develop such character
The lessons of our history and inheritance are as hard won treasures, stored in the mounds of our culture, kept for their timely use later. All that we have handed down and maybe some things we've forgotten, all that we are heir to, the patents for the wheel and fire, the methods of agriculture and husbandry, the thoughts and deeds of the founders, all of this vast, invested legacy is ours now, to carry forth or squander. A little restraint will keep this potential growing, a sense of place in the scheme of it all will prepare us. Life grows even more meaningful as we learn that it goes on without us, because this might give us the notion to become respectable ancestors.
26.0, Raising Great Beasts Worthwhile to be persistent To not dine at home Is promising Worthwhile to cross the great stream
The legacy of mankind is greater than any man and the best of us stand upon older achievements. To inherit all of this is a trust that our brightest lights have endowed. It can be a trust, or simply ours, or our own heirs' in turn. Some of the generations will leave the world a better place than they found it, while others might hand down horrible things, depletion and debt, devastation and unfinished wars, bad laws and toxic ideas. Some with long vision will invest in the long term and an infrastructure. Others refuse to look past the next election or payday. It is up to each heir to pick and choose a bequest for the next generations and even to decide whether or not the concerns of their heirs will be weighed at all. For centuries of our history, some of our cultures have held respect for elders or reverence for ancestors in highest regard as a sacred duty. Yet too few of us truly see the real point in all this: if we, as heirs, understand the perspective of heirs, if we know it in our hearts and bones, we will be less inclined to be bad ancestors ourselves. We forget this today. Not dining at home, and crossing great streams, puts us in a larger world, serving higher powers.
209

26.M, Key Words Domesticating, taming, civilizing, harnessing, schooling, training, husbandry Stewardship, trust, legacy, dynasty, foundation, endowment, usufruct, service Inheritance, responsibility, discipline, restraint, inhibition; investing in potential Mound building, cultural accumulation; consolidating gains, making them work Banking, investment, conservation (as distinct from conservatism), guardianship One's place in history, shoulders of giants, ancestry & posterity, making destiny
26G, From the Glossary da4 (to be) accomplished, best, better, big, complete, critical, crucial, developed, enormous, entire, extreme, far, full, fully grown, good, grand, great(er, est), heavy, high, large(r), (very, greatly) important, long, loud, major, mature, mighty, more, most, noble, noteworthy, old, overall, (more, most) perfect, pure, realized, ripe, seasoned, serious, significant, strong, successful, vast, whole, wholesome, vital; a lot of, full of, lots of; master-, (a, the) completeness, (full) development, entirety, grand(eur, ness), greatness, growth, (great) importance, largesse, majority, maturity, vastness, wholeness; a great deal, (very) much, very; already, completely, entirely, fully, greatly, thoroughly, wholly, en masse , well-; of (great, crucial, vital) importance chu4 (to) take care of, care for, provide for, tend (to), attend (to), keep, raise, rear, feed, nurture, sustain, nourish, bring up, support, shelter, cherish, train, manage, cultivate, retain, restrain, tame, (bring under) control, herd, domesticate, raise beasts animals, brutes; accumulate, store up, gather, hoard, reserve (s, ed, ing); (a, the) nurture, cultivation, culture, domestication, husbandry, management, training; domestic animal; raising ... beasts
26.T, Tuan Zhuan Raising great beasts
The firm (is) tenacious Staunch (and) substantial, bright (and) distinguished Each day improving the character The firm rises and honors excellence The power to stop (with) power Greatness (means) uprightness To not dine at home (is) promising: To nourish excellence Worthwhile to cross the great stream: To resonate with heaven
210

26.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.1: correcting father, the young one questions)
This will get harsh Worthwhile to quit
26.1x (This) will get harsh, worthwhile to quit: (And) not provoke a crisis Nurture, training and discipline will sometimes make all of the difference between the noble beast and a monster. This young one was born with some spirit. His hot blood would have him act now, but another possesses a greater power to train him, and will tighten the restrictions with every rash advance. Not only must he dine at home, and stay away from any great streams, his immediate ancestor locks him up in his upstairs room, withholds his share of the family's fortune and grounds him. To end the tantrum now is to quit making everything worse. This might have been an attempt to find where some limits were. Success. His rights and duties are one. The thing he has just tried to be is just not an option: it is stayed by an upper hand. Not many things are less fun to be than a spoiled, rich brat with no flatterers around.
26.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.2: adorning his beard)
The carriage is relieved of its axle mounts
26.2x A carriage relieved of (its) axle mounts: In the center (and) not to be blamed He makes an honest attempt to not dine at home, to broaden his horizons, to cross the great stream and see something new. But someone has undone the strap on his axle and otherwise sabotaged his most noble aims. It makes little difference if these vandals struck at random or if this is some kind of message: he must dine on this side of the stream until he makes his needed repairs. We assume he already knows he can now cover twice as much ground by lightening his load and relying upon the kindness of strangers, but he does not want to go native in some distant part of the realm. The traveling scholar, you see, might look like a less worthy drifter. In either event he still has a great gulf to cross here, and things to learn yet about having class and the classes. Having the means means so little when you cannot move forward.
211

26.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.3: three set out, lose one, one finds companion)
A fine horse gives chase Warranting difficult persistence Daily* training at chariot and defense Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
26.3x Worthwhile to have somewhere to go: A higher (and) unifying purpose He has all that he needs - and way too much more. The young noble has a difficult education ahead. He is given the horse whose spirit will not be broken. The swords that he trains with are real. The books he studies have depth. Whatever part he plays, he plays hard and well to sharpen his skills. He also loses those forms of behavior which will not lead him to excellence, and this means a lot of normal human activity. When the time comes to break free from his practice, into a world not bound by his theories or gates, his sharp skills and quick senses will be ready to take advantage of any situation, including defense and retreat. And he might even use these skills in loving, or cooking a meal. Although he is young, this training is an investment in the children of his children. His high expectations will serve the higher purpose.
26.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.4: this is not one's own domain, no blame)
A young bull's corral Most promising
26.4x Six fourth (is) most fortunate: To (still) have well-being The young bull comes of age. His horns start to bud and he starts to get new ideas of turf, and redefining the peace. While his horns are his right by birth, a big world around him will lay claim to its rights as well. The husbandman has his own plans and notion of property rights, and insists on a lot of control. In the course of growth of every new power, however great it is set to become, there are places where destiny may be forestalled or cheated entirely, a time when a force may be tamed or coopted. This is no secret to rich and powerful clans: its regular use has kept them in power. The way to win here is to be the one who controls or restrains his own ambitions, or makes them seem shared with those of the powers that be. To roam one's own pen, and service all of those cows, isn't leading a wild herd: but it's also not being an it.
212

26.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.5: being true like bond, wealth uses neighbors)
A gelded boar's tusks Promising
26.5x Six fifth has promise: There will (still) be rewards Here is a small and clean solution to a large and dirty problem. Now the tusks once bared in a menacing snarl have a hint of the saint in their gleam, and the world has just become perfect. Although he's still kept confined, it's only against his playful leaps into the lap of his master. He's allowed to keep some of his nature. He'll have more friends this way too. He gets to be part of a team. He's guaranteed the serenity to accept what he cannot change. Culture is a veneer no longer over this wild beast. It now goes all the way down, only not quite as far. Good fortune for the one with the knife, for knowing it takes but a nip at the root of unruly behavior, a little effort to get great results. And this is a thing we have handed down, after losing so many great warriors and hunters to boars. Our hunting party includes those gone before.
26.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.6: city wall falls back into moat, explain orders)
What is heaven's thoroughfare? Fulfillment
26.6x What is heaven's course? The way the great advance Is this a highway to heaven or what? The young heir inherits the high, sacred place, the shining mountain, held so much in awe by the mound builders. Who can forget the whole point of building these mounds: to gain a commanding view from above? To honor the wonderful height, he restores the ancestral shrine and sets a great feast for the stars, and nobles and worthies too. All heaven attends his fine service, and the stars have a marvelous time, although they eat little or nothing. When you set a table for gods you get to eat the leftovers, so plenty remains for those not dining at home, and for guests from across the great waters. Is the top of this heap as close as we'll get to heaven? Was the fine time worth saving up for? What does a peak experience justify? Fulfilling ourselves or our duties, fulfillment is freedom: it lets us move on.
213

26, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 45, Cui, Collectedness qian gua (inverse): 25, Wu Wang, Without Pretense jiao gua (reverse): 33, Dun, Distancing hu gua (nuclear): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
26, Notes * 26.3 Most of the received texts, including very old sources like the Mawangdui, have Yue, saying or speaking, instead of ri4, day or daily, in this line. Nonetheless, many recent translators and scholars have emended the text here. See Source Text Discrepancies & Emendations, following the Matrix translation. The use of ri4 at 26.T also suggests this emendation. If pressed, I would translate yue xian yu wei as "Vowing to train at chariot and defense," which would preserve some of the implication of dedicated sacrifice suggested by the Zhi Gua.
26, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Malkuth in Assiah * Tarot: Ten of Pentacles * Astrology: Pluto in Earth (vis. plutocracy)
26, Quotations * If men have not that in them that fits them to precede others, they are without the way proper to man. They ... can only be pronounced defunct monuments of Antiquity. --Zhuangzi * If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants. --Sir Isaac Newton, paraphrasing Bernard of Chartres, 12th Cent. * When we are planning for posterity, we ought to remember that virtue is not hereditary. --Thomas Paine * The ultimate test of a moral society is the kind of world it leaves to its children. --Dietrich Bonhoeffer * The ultimate result of shielding men from the effects of folly is to fill the world with fools. --Herbert Spencer * We do not inherit the earth from our ancestors; we borrow it from our children. --Haida Indian saying * Some believe all that parents, tutors, and kindred believe. They take their principles by inheritance, and defend them as they would their estates, because they are born heirs to them. [also Gua 18] --Alan Watts
214

GUA 27, YI2, HUNGRY MOUTH
Binary 100 001 = 33; Zhen below, Gen above
27.X, Overall Image Beneath the mountain is thunder Hungry mouth The noble young one, accordingly,
is careful with words and expressions And moderate in drinking and eating
Thunder lies deep in the mountain: a rumbling deep in the belly, or a great potential for energy. The volcano awaits an abundance of pressure. The light waits in the food for its freedom. In unexplored mines, on the hoof, in the silos, in a life unexamined, energy lurks in its latent forms, locked up as a potential. Then there are the nutrients to go along with the calories. Now just add an appetite and an open mouth to feed, and then there can be nourishment. The wise attend the gaping mouth, food going in, speech coming out, since food for thought can be wholesome or toxic as well. We can choose our menus and our hungers too, according to what we would nourish.
27.0, Nourishment Persistence is promising Study the hungry mouth From the searching mouth to the feeding
Getting to know the true and false hungers and choosing to feed what is best and right, the wise will make agreements between their competing needs and select what goes into their makeup. Concern for the fuel is regard for the flame. Know others by their hungers and wants and infer what they seek to nourish by what they chase around with jaws agape and snapping. Who and what a body becomes is made up out of this diet. Who and what the mind becomes is assembled out of experience. Who and what spirit becomes is also a part of the food chain. There are those who eat all things in sight and those who'll believe every thing that they hear. There are diners with excellent taste and those who just pick to be picky. Then there are the nervous birds and those who will worry themselves halfway to death over whether a meal is healthy. The attractions of combustible substances, those matters at hand that are richest in energy, or in exothermic potential or delicious implication, drive us forward through life. It's just the way things are set up, along the whole length of the food chain. We need to get out there, hunt and kill things, to turn them into us.
215

27.M, Key Words Appetites, hungers, drives; sustenance, nutrition, nurture, provision, nourishment Meeting needs, furnishing necessities, self-reliance, self-assertion, competence Choices of menu, diet, good taste, selecting the input for output, fostering health Finding the genuine & productive appetites, starving the false; potential energy Appetite and its gratification, nutrition as a science, fostering growth and the true Nutrient and energy cycles, raw material and fuel; hungering properly; G.I.G.O.
27.G, From the Glossary yi2 (a, the) appetite, hunger (s); nourishment, nutrition, sustenance, jaws, open jaws, mouth, hungry mouth, chin, cheek; self-care; (to) take care of oneself, keep fit, consume, eat, take in, ingest, feed on, nourish, rear, feed, furnish necessities, care for; hunger (s, ed, ing); (to be) appetitive, hungry, oral; with appetite, with hunger
27.T, Tuan Zhuan Hungry mouth
Persistence (is) promising: Nourish uprightness (and) in due order good fortune Study the hungry mouth: Study what is the purpose in nourishment From the searching mouth (to) the feeding: Study what are the sources of nourishment Heaven (and) earth nourish the myriad beings The wise ones nourish the worthy
(and) thereby reach the whole of humanity Hungry mouth's opportune timing (is) very important here!
216

27.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.1: deprive bed of legs, don't dismiss persistence)
Forsaking your spirit tortoise* Looking at me with hungry mouth hanging open Disappointing
27.1x Looking at me (with) hungry mouth hanging open: Truly lacking (as) a basis for respect You already have most of the answers you need. We are born with a great wisdom, a wonderful hunger and thirst. The humans whom we know best have been studying the human dao for a hundred thousand years. These lessons have worked their way into our genes and tastes. Give a toddler too many choices of dishes, spread across the whole spectrum of foods, and in weeks, with no coaching, he will learn to select perfect meals, with hunger for all the right foods and no appetite for the wrong ones. But a modest amount of sufficiency unto ourselves is a critical part of this process. We must at least get up and walk to our prey. What else should we put into gaping, drooling holes? The medicine tortoise, the one long life that we live, is a feast for the right predators. Thankfully this tortoise is less than fleet of foot: one may catch up.
27.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.2: hold, don't push, avoid decrease to increase)
Subverted appetites Dismissing the customary, Going into the hills hungering Going boldly into failure
27.2x Six second goes boldly (into) failure: Behavior (that) strays from its kind He listens to his belly, then listens to his head. While down in the valley, he hungers for food on the summit. Up on the summit, he misses the food in the valley. He runs around a lot this way, but it does not lead to fitness. He only feeds his inadequacies, while talents double over with hunger. There is really only one of him, but it doesn't agree with itself. It doesn't go hunting together. It's more like begging than hunting, or being eaten alive by a hunger. Good taste agrees with good appetite and knows it must munch on what is at hand, or be as a sheep on the prowl, after greener grasses, or as be mutton for a greater hunger. It might be best to starve the bad hungers now and then learn to hunger first for things needed, and then for things wanted and last for things he's told he should want - even if the economy is hungry for his needs.
217

27.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.3: so elegant, as if to drip, enduring persistence)
Dismissing the appetites Persistence has pitfalls For ten years not to be functional Is not a direction with merit
27.3x (For) ten years not to be functional: A path greatly sideways His tastes want to run towards something a bit more exotic, such as maybe to go beyond food to live on water and light, like special, holy water and moonbeam light. How glamorous that would be, how elegant and ethereal. Malnutrition of the spirit begins in the body forgotten. To fast several days can be a great thing. But we don't mistake our belly's growling for some totem animal power, or the lightness in our heads for the light of understanding. We cannot thrive by feeding mind nothing but thoughts about spirit. The mind will starve, or it develops without basic parts. Great spirit, like that of swift horses, runs throughout the being. Spit out this mouthful of crazy ideas, don't swallow that: light hides in food. Go with your gut, but use your head too. Fad and fashion diets are not for real people. They are not fueling anyone.
27.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao 21.4: biting on dry, bony meat, get funding, arrows)
Top-heavy appetite is promising The tiger searches, staring and glaring With its passion to hunt and give chase Not wrong
27.4x Top-heavy appetite holds promise: Ascending extends (what is) known He goes to great lengths, and heights, as a hunter, commanding the broadest views. Power being the rate at which energy is transformed, a higher power will mean that much will be transformed. Each and every one of those furry, little creatures would love to be the tiger's happy, woodland friend. It isn't the tiger's fault they are on the menu instead. He has no choice but to follow his nature. Back in the good old days, he would hunt for a weak and stupid human, and back then we were all well-served by his natural menu selection. He was always objective about this - he could not rely on pet food and the rare volunteers. He won't be given snacks or treats for being so cute. Humanity shares the predator nature. Some make apologies, some give thanks, but the best is to live the best life, to honor the meal, not waste it in futile existence.
218

27.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.5: be true, kind, no question, kindness is worth)
Dismissing the customary To abide in persistence is promising But not suited to crossing great streams
27.5x To abide in persistence holds promise: Accepting in order to follow the superior Behind another's successful example, he experiments with diet, trying out new ways of doing the familiar. For a time life will be out of balance. It is not a time to witness things fairly, or to go fast forward with health, especially not across the great water. He forages in new fields where the taste is confusing, searches for missing nutrients, each one of which praises itself as the basic substance of life. The body with life at stake wants patience and time to decide and needs to work out new ways to appraise the wants and their satisfactions. First is the necessary, then the sufficient, then the higher wants. The structure will be reconfigured once the basis has changed. There will be subtle signs to look out for. To study this well means reducing the variables by keeping things simple. It is not a time to make promises or to feed expectations.
27.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.6: lost return, major defeat, ten years no recovery)
At the source of the appetites Brutal but promising Worthwhile to cross the great stream
27.6x (At) the source of the appetites (with) a brutal promise: (There are) well-earned rewards Like the priest on a mission to cannibal land, he sets himself up to provide, to give to those who seek in hunger below, knowing, we hope, to not drop his own meaty self into their gaping jaws. Within his own frame of reference, he might not be so pretentious at all, and note that his health has him roaming about, wanting to share. Some tribes across the great water will make no distinction twixt body and soul and already know flesh is bread and blood wine. Let him first expect to learn as much as he plans to teach and to keep his wit trained on their hungers. Being fuel for flame often means getting burned; giving oneself often means being taken or even refused. The top of the food chain is always food for someone. To give them fish or to make them dependent leaves him no way home: they will bite that hand, then eat him alive.
219

27, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess qian gua (inverse): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth jiao gua (reverse): 62, Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess hu gua (nuclear): 02, Kun, Accepting zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 29, 59, 60, 61 shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
27, Notes * 27.1 The tortoise image accompanies several hollow gua shapes, yin surrounded by yang. See also 41.5 & 42.2, both with Zhi Gua 61.
27, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Assiah of Atziluth * Tarot: Princess of Wands * Astrology: Caput Draconis in Fire
27, Quotations * To a man with an empty stomach, food is God. --Gandhi * A hungry man is not a free man. --Spanish proverb * Grub first, then ethics. --Bertold Brecht * We of the Tleilaxu believe that in all the universe there is only the insatiable appetite of matter, that energy is the only true solid. And energy learns. Hear me well, Princess, energy learns. This, we call power. --Frank Herbert, Dune Messiah * I saw them eating and I knew who they were. --Kahlil Gibran * The soul, like the body, lives by what it feeds on. --J.G. Holland * Understanding human needs is half the job of meeting them. --Adlai E. Stevenson * We do not know what we want and yet we are responsible for what we are that is the fact. --Jean-Paul Sartre * We don't know what we want, but we're ready to bite somebody to get it. --Will Rogers * Our minds are like our stomachs; they are whetted by the change of their food, and variety supplies both with fresh appetites. --Quintilian
220

GUA 28, DA4 GUO4, GREATNESS IN EXCESS
Binary 011 110 = 30; Xun below, Dui above
28.X, Overall Image The lake rises over the trees Greatness in excess The noble young one, accordingly, stands alone and undaunted And steps back from the world without sorrow
Rain dancers call down heaven itself. Now the sky has a weight few prepared for. Orchards and structures under the lake, cries become bubbles below: this is more than a little over the top. The great passes through, the local world is almost gone. This is not wrath or fury, not divine justice or plan, only a thoughtless, ham-handed fist of a world much bigger than us, far too great to care for the parts of the whole. Here is an adventure to which one will not need to travel. There's just time to collect a few wits, to step up and get nimbly moving, no time for fret or regrets. The losses won't be so for long, once the past is washed away. An overwhelming finality helps.
28.0, Greatness in Excess The ridgepole bends Worthwhile to have somewhere to go Fulfillment
Too much of existence comes to visit one place, so you may be crowded out soon. Nothing of this will ask you for patience. The wind with driving rain soaks the old thatched roof through, the ridgepole flexes under strain. Meetings like this with the powers that be, or the peaks of the human experience, seem to avoid all the boredom well enough. But when they crest, expect to relocate quickly and have somewhere to go in mind. This glut of compelling experience might be avoidable, given some serious speed, a way out and a clear path to high ground. The wise will make room by letting it move them. The tough are already long gone. And who knows? Plan B in prospect is seldom superior; in retrospect, it is always the good one, or the hidden plan of the spirits and gods, that we just could not see until we awakened. What this is will change what we are. This is critical mass and an exigent transit. Now we will not stay the same even more than before. If you step in this river twice you are done. Above and beyond is the call, to life in interesting times. Have we then overestimated ourselves and degrees of commitment? Now's the time to take a deep breath and go.
221

28.M, Key Words Inundation, saturation, surcharge, extremity, crisis, emergency, stress, pressure Encroachment, transgression, overload, live load, hurried adapting, resilience Surpassing, overwhelming, extraordinary, too much; going beyond, transition Peak experience, stretching limits, pushing envelopes; more than bargained for Excess, unleashing, abnormality, heavy matters, under strain, humbling events Going far beyond, greatly transcending, greeting something greater than yourself
28.G, From the Glossary da4 (to be) accomplished, best, better, big, complete, critical, crucial, developed, enormous, entire, extreme, far, full, fully grown, good, grand, great(er, est), high, heavy, large(r), (very, greatly) important, long, loud, major, mature, more, most, mighty, noble, noteworthy, old, overall, (more, most) perfect, pure, realized, ripe, seasoned, serious, significant, strong, successful, vast, whole, wholesome, vital; a lot of, full of, lots of; master-, (a, the) completeness, (full) development, entirety, grand(eur, ness), greatness, growth, (great) importance, majority, vastness, wholeness largesse, maturity; a great deal, (very) much, very; already, entirely, fully, completely, greatly, thoroughly, wholly, en masse , well-; of (great, crucial, vital) importance guo4 (to) go beyond, go past, exceed, surpass, transcend, miss, stray from, pass (by, over); bypass, get by, transgress, trespass, stray, err, inundate, predominate, exceed proper limits; (s, ed, ing); (to be) passing, transient, errant, past, in excess, extreme, exceptional, too much (of), excessive, beyond, above, overly, unusual, extraordinary; greater/larger than; (a, the) error, transgression, fault, excess (iveness) (s); will err; to a fault, to extremity, to excess, to extremes
28.T Greatness in excess
Greatness is that which exceeds The ridgepole bends:
Beginning (and) end (are) yielding The firm (is) excessive but central
(Be) adaptable and glad to move Worthwhile to have somewhere to go: And after this, fulfillment Greatness in excess's opportune timing (is) very important now!
222

28.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 43: Guai, Decisiveness
(Fan Yao* 43.1: vigorously advancing toes, going not successful)
For cushions, using white thatch grass Make no mistakes*
28.1x Cushioning with white thatch grass: The flexible is on the bottom He offers a fine, little sacrifice, that the world might treat him more gently. Sweet incense wafts through the room and his offering mats of woven, white mao grass cushion his delicate gifts. It is timely, now, to show his great care and to act with a great carefulness. It's hard to think that these little things might truly alter the course of great events. We do not yet know just how much protection these little white mats will afford if and when the floodwaters rise over the threshold and the roof comes crashing down. But isn't it odd that the mats are made out of roof thatch? Maybe he prays for less interesting times than those that Greatness in Excess promise to give. Maybe he feels lowly and weak because life has not been as easy or kind. But under this roof is no place to hide: one wants a heads-up caution here, not the fussy kind.
28.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.2: persuaded in one's legs, to abide is timely)
The withered poplar sprouts a new shoot An older gentleman finds himself a maiden to marry Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
28.2x (An) older gentleman (and) maiden companion: Going beyond with each other's support Wonders will cease, but not just yet. His springtime might have been a bit springier, but this thought is not slowing him down. Perhaps he is even stepping more lively now that the end is in sight and he runs out of time. The old prune is a plum again, the old dog has picked up a new trick. And, if our young lady can bring our old goat back to life, there may yet be some children or heirs. In times such as these, the real priorities show, the kind which reach far past our wisdoms. Even now, life is tough stuff to stop. Now, who would have thought that these sublime stirrings were some kind of force majeure? We should not be quick to judge Eros a light and frivolous force. This kind of force insists in the subtlest ways, but it authors the species and drives our evolution by wanting what it wants. These waters run deep in our beings.
223

28.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.3: oppressed by stone, grab thorns, do not see wife)
The ridgepole is deformed Ominous
28.3x The ridgepole's deformity becomes trouble: It is not enough to assume support He kept trying to get his friends to call him an architect, but they only wanted to use the word "poet." Living and then later learning is one way to move through life, but one picks up a lot to be later unlearned. Living to learn is another: for folks living thus, even the stones are good teachers. Living alone in one's mind is a third way to live, and for these, misfortune is often the way fortune works. It is now time to pay the tuition for a crash course in applied engineering: deflection, bending and failure in simple beams under live loads in worst-case scenarios. The pressure grows nearly unbearable. The stress and strain is more urgent than an omen and more signal than a sign. Failure is not a slow motion process. The acceleration of gravity is constant, so our poet's acceleration may be the only variable. Move to higher ground, quickly.
28.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.4: the well is being relined, nothing is wrong)
The ridgepole holds up Promising To take much more, then deficiency
28.4x The ridgepole's holding up holds promise: Not a failing onto those below Though it sags when the sky grows too heavy, the beam gives fair warning this time. It seems bent enough to warrant assessment. A provisional brace or repair might, or might not, permit a rest or long absence. Some stresses accumulate, some go away, but both of these happen in time, and time plays the odds, and odds mean margins of safety. Failure and bending are two different states: failure will happen just once, but bending in stress is the best time to study a structure. When one part reveals a weakness, remember you work with a system, not just a pile of boards: the trouble could be in the groundwork. If the margin of safety is set at the norm, then normally the roof will not fall in and kill you. You will want this to not happen more than half of the time. You only want to be killed by extraordinary events, so measure this well.
224

28.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao* 32.5: continuing in character, her promise, his problem)
The withered poplar* bears flowers An older lady finds herself a young gentleman to marry No blame, no praise
28.5x The withered poplar bears flowers: (But) how could this last? * (An) older lady (and) young male companion: So inviting (to) condemnation Good for our lovely, plucky old lady! With wrinkle goop and war paint, and some would say not enough else, she goes on the hunt and brings home a healthy, young buck. How discreet can you be when you kick up your heels like that? There will be no children of course, and no praise from the horrified gossips, and one day he will move on somewhat wiser. In great times life knows its allies, sometimes by warmth. The value of such an arrangement is not so commonly known, but its worth is clear to those so arranged. Why even care what a gossip will think? How could this last? Can it be more than one final fling if the flower saps the tree's strength and renewal is not from the roots? A last hurrah or maybe hooray! Why not ask this one instead: Who dares to measure the time? And is the eternal really all that it's rumored to be?
28.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.6: encountering with those horns, embarrassing)
Too much to wade into, immersing one's head Brutal Make no mistakes
28.6x Too much to wade into comes into bad luck: But not deserving blame You cannot get more surrounded by greatness than when the great stream crosses your village. Confronted by rising waters, already over his head, he has no time to plead for his fortune or fate. This will no doubt be a moving experience. And the choice to be made is so simple: to keep life's temple afloat, or feed it to the fishes. If he has not learned how to swim, or build a boat out of wishes, he has just failed his last and best test. His passing will at least be dramatic and maybe even heroic. But life in the long run will profit without him, as folks of the future grow flippers which are also useful as feet. Imagine this is a speed learning course, with current events getting swifter. He is out of his depth, or in too deep, in way over his head, and in the deep end of the gene pool. This is what he's made of: there is no blame.
225

28, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth qian gua (inverse): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess jiao gua (reverse): 61, Zhong Fu, The Truth Within hu gua (nuclear): 01, Qian, Creating zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 62, 56, 55, 30 shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
28, Notes * 28.1 Both the meaning and the humor in this line seem to have gone over almost everybody's head. One is cushioning one's valuables from below, but it's the roof which is about to come down. This line is about acting upon misplaced caution, as its fan y ao, 43.1, is about misplaced incaution or vigor. This could be similar in meaning to our more modern "rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic." * 28.5 The word Yang2, translated willow at 28.2, can refer to the whole willow family (salicaceae), including willow, cottonwood, aspen, poplar, etc. The family thrives in wet and flooded areas. I'm not certain that the authors were oberving this, but the normal reproduction of salicaceae is by cloning or suckering; sexual reproduction is exceptional in this family.
28, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Briah of Yetzirah * Tarot: Queen of Swords (a knighting ceremony, a name of power) * Astrology: Gemini Ascending, Mutable Air
28, Quotations * ... they content themselves with dark surmisings of nature's magic language, playing on fancy as a child might play on his father's magic wand. They know not what forces they have as vassals, what worlds are bound to obey them. --Novalis, The Novices of Sais * Now we are once again at the limits of our wits, where the minds of you mortals go overboard. Why do you make common cause with us if you cannot follow through? You want to fly and are not proof to dizziness? Did we force ourselves on you, or you on us? --Goethe, Faust * These are the times that try men's souls. --Thomas Paine * Great necessities call out great virtues. --Abigail Adams * Do not be afraid to take a big step if one is indicated. You cannot cross a chasm in two small jumps. --David Lloyd George * In a time of drastic change it is the learners who inherit the future. The learned usually find themselves equipped to live in a world that no longer exists. --Eric Hoffer * Reality is the leading cause of stress amongst those in touch with it. --Jane Wagner (and Lily Tomlin) * May you live in interesting times. --Chinese curse
226

GUA 29, KAN3, EXPOSURE
Binary 010 010 = 18; Kan below, Kan above; Chong Gua
29.X, Overall Image Water is ever arriving Repeated exposure The noble young one, accordingly,
continues in character and conduct Practicing teaching and serving
The water moves on continuously, filling up the chasms and voids as it moves, ever ready and reliable, like a stout heart. The little boat is pushed from the shoreline, just above the rapids. The commitment was made: there is no turning back. The boatman has narrowed his choices, picked a line through the water and stone. Then he does what is needed, as though life were at stake. It is not a time to be elsewhere thinking of options and other places to be. The best time to learn is when the subject is useful right now. The young noble encounters what lies before him, committed with all of his heart to the work, rising up to each new challenge. At this edge the will is to live.
29.0, Repeated Exposure Be true To keep the heart secure is fulfillment Advance will have value
The river knows its true path through the canyon. It will know without any question or doubt. This may be a little too perfect for us to attain, although we can learn to get closer by putting what gets in the way out of mind, stripping down to bare essentials, not giving up, not losing heart, accepting the canyon's stone limits as handholds and places to stand. There is a great sense of freedom when all of the constraints are so clearly defined and the choices are simple. Life is starkened and vivified. Exigence shows the way out, the emergency, an urgency to emerge with a heart still pounding. This is how to make wishes come true: to give them no other choice. When we can't afford to lose faith or heart, necessity makes all the needed connections. This is what leads to success. We use the situation at hand as though it could not be otherwise. We call out for reassurance between the canyon walls, but the echoes only mock us. Good fortune: there is something out there, not a dark and endless void. Exposure gets the blood pumping, brings out our best and resets the values into right order. Exposure and risk show the way to the way and attune us in to optimum channels.
227

29.M, Key Words Repeated, multiple, familiar with + crisis, risk, hazard, peril, exigency, trial, danger Pit, chasm, canyon, gorge, strait, test; living on the edge, the way out is through Immerse, plunge in, undergo, commit, fall to, get involved; fear, vertigo, anxiety Concentration, alertness, challenge, unarguable constraints, the will to live, heart Flow, water's approach to givens, necessity to perform; fluidity, grace, courage Enlightening confrontations, the hard fact as teacher; Castaneda's having to believe
29.G, From the Glossary kan3 (a, the) pit, pitfall, hole, cavity, snare, trap, canyon, chasm, defile, gorge, depth, precipice, grave, risk, exposure, danger, dangerous position, dangerous place, crisis, exigency, critical situation; gravity; water necessity (s); (to) trap, entrap, bury in a pit; (a, the) pit's, canyon's, chasm's, risk's; (a pun)
29.T, Tuan Zhuan Repeated exposure
(Means) twice the risk The water replenishes but does not pile up
Making progress (through) risk yet never losing its confidence To keep the heart secure (is) fulfillment:
When making use of the firmness within Progress will be valued:
To continue on will be an accomplishment Heavenly hazards do not permit climbing Earthly hazards (are) mountains (and) rivers, hills (and) heights Sovereigns (and) patriarchs arrange hazards in order to protect their domains Risk's timely application (is) very important here!
228

29.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
(Fan Yao 60.1: not going past the courtyard door, no blame)
Twice the exposure Going into the canyon's inner recesses Foreboding
29.1x Twice the exposure going into the canyon: To lose the way (is) foreboding Accustomed to life in the deep, habituated to troubles, he begins to feel at home here, only dimly recalling a time his life was not lived on an edge. He may get the bright idea that being careless is the new way to flirt with danger. To go still further down, into the inner recesses of the pit down in the canyon is truly a challenging venture. While the canyon might not protect him from rescue, getting lost where none with any sense go might provide such an insurance. A pit is a dead end, a grave situation. A pit is a trap, not a path, you cannot follow it through; it is a niche, but the wrong one to live in. Too deep can be just as bad as too high, or too far out or gone. Now to risk or gamble a life is a way to savor life, and a way out of mediocrity. But when it fails to work out as planned, our gene pool works more of this out of the system.
29.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
(Fan Yao 08.2: joining with them comes from within, commit)
The canyon holds risks Seek modest gains
29.2x Seek modest gains: (One is) not yet out of the middle Were the abyss to take an interest in him, bring him his meals, or sing him to sleep, or save him somehow from his own overreaching, it couldn't be the abyss anymore. It is free of all such cares and will leave all choices related to care to the small, living things it envelops. The young ones must learn about danger, why certain leaps are seldom successful, why they want to keep going one well-grasped hold at a time, with little successive successes, until they come out on top. Alone within the abyss, however, there is a friend to be found, in the echoes of our own struggles. In these we seek an encouragement to keep making encouraging noises. Splat is such a sad, lonesome sound when none are around to hear it. Collect all of your various selves and wits and hold them together. Eschew leaps of faith and jumps to conclusions.
229

29.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.3: well cleaned but nothing consumed, show ruler)
Coming and going, canyon after canyon The narrow ledges are also headrests Going into the canyon's inner recesses Is not at all useful
29.3x Coming (and) going, canyon (after) canyon: In the end, not much (is) accomplished Halfway up the canyon wall, with abysses above and below, he finds a well-placed ledge. A long pause now would refresh our exhausted climber. His breathing has grown erratic, his heart is not pounding in rapture, his fingers grope more in alarm than with skill. This state does not conduce to survival, only to changing his noble self into a blot down at the bottom and a fading echo up at the top. Then all of the happy, encouraging echoes would cease. This should not be a struggle: we do not want to struggle with rocks the size of cliffs. Good nichemanship should be a skill and tool of the climber, to find a good place and to own it. Perhaps the ledge will go sideways: after all most of them do. What a perfect place to put a stone couch and rock pillow! And what sense to breathe deeply, get bearings and enjoy a great view!
29.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.4: grave approach, oppressed in a gilded chariot)
A jug of wine, a basket of rice or two, and utensils of clay Handed expediently through the window Ultimately not a mistake
29.4x A jug of wine (and) a basket of rice (or) two: Firmness (and) flexibility meet here On the brink of an important change, the critical thing is to cut through illusion and nonsense. The crises which crowd the time leave no time for the frivolous ceremony. Warrior, advisor, doctor and shaman will speak to the chief in urgent terms, devoid of allusions and protocols. They need their words to sink in right now, like stones, unbuoyed by etiquette. The knot on the gate is cut, not untied. The slow ones are knocked aside. Teachers don't flatter students. Time becomes precious. He who has just a few moments left is rich with an unclouded mind. We cannot take the passive approaches: all of those rules slow us down. The petty tyrants are disobeyed now. Candor and frankness are welcome. The window lets in fresh air with the goodies, and new opportunities too. Must all of this weight, this ballast and jetsam, return?
230

29.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.5: avoid errors, elder son captains, the younger)
The pit is not flowing over To appreciate the level attained Is not a mistake
29.5x The pit is not flowing over: The middle is not yet complete His level of fullness is still lacking flow. The waters are still collecting now, still well below the rim of the pool, and also collecting a bit of scum and debris. A great and flowing vitality will not be hurried along, although it would help to hasten a future fulfillment by plugging up a few leaks. Water will have the patience and presence to fulfill each need in due time and move along once each is done. Meanwhile, his mean level grows, slowly approaching the rim, his threshold to the beyond. A fool might exhaust himself here, foaming and frothing, trying to splash himself into the future, or leaping to hasty conclusions. Maturity is not just in fullness: it recognizes what is and starts there. Just think that this much time to fill up must mean a great capacity. Even the muddiest water, down in the smelliest pit, is rain again some day.
29.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.6: dispersing hot-bloodedness, getting distance)
Bound up with braided rope and stranded cord Put away inside a thicket of thorny brambles Three years without gains Unfortunate
29.6x Top six loses the way: An unfortunate three years Fresh from the pits, but still down there at heart, he keeps his heart pounding with wild actions and unruly behavior. Reaching the top of the canyon is only reaching the surface, not like the summit where hot blood is cooled by brisk winds. He said he was looking for limits and not just restraints. Private conviction now gets a whole new meaning, as he sets himself up for a tough test of wits: an impressive escape to follow this impressive trap he's got into. He's surrounded on all six sides now, while canyons only have two, but still with narrowed horizons and no view over the the top. Options narrow, space becomes time, a thousand tomorrows to plan and go over the lessons. The challenge he has set himself to, for the sake of advancing his purposes, leaves him three years in bewilderment, in which to review his progress.
231

29, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 30, Li, Arising qian gua (inverse): 29, Kan, Exposure jiao gua (reverse): 29, Kan, Exposure (chong gua 2) hu gua (nuclear): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
29, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Yesod in Briah * Tarot: Nine of Cups * Astrology: Luna in Water
29, Quotations * Put all your eggs in one basket, and Watch That Basket. --Mark Twain * You gain strength, courage and confidence by every experience in which you really stop to look fear in the face. You must do the thing which you think you cannot do. --Eleanor Roosevelt * For all on a razor's edge it stands. --Homer, The Iliad * A decent boldness ever meets with friends. --Homer, The Odyssey * Necessity, mother of invention. --William Wycherley * A good scare is worth more to a man than good advice. --Edgar Howe * Every man has a right to risk his life in order to preserve it. --Rousseau * I am glad to the brink of fear. --Ralph Waldo Emerson * "I can't explain myself, I'm afraid, sir," said Alice, "because I'm not myself, you see." "I don't see," said the caterpillar. --Lewis Carroll * That which does not destroy me makes me stronger. --Nietzsche * Life shrinks or expands according to one's courage. --Anais Nin * Fear is a question: What are you afraid of, and why? Just as the seed of health is in illness, because illness contains information, your fears are a treasure house of self- knowledge if you explore them. --Marilyn Ferguson
232

GUA 30, LI2, ARISING
Binary 101 101 = 45; Li below, Li above; Chong Gua
30.X, Overall Image The light appears twice Arising The mature human being, accordingly, Is continuous in clarifying and illuminating
into the four directions
Flaming beauty consuming the present is mounted on flames consuming the past. Sunshine hides to rise again. It hides in the logs to flame again. It hides in the grass, in the salad, in the silos, in the cow, in the steak, and it flames up again as mind in the beings. The flame is not feeding on fuel, it is or was the fuel, sunlight mingled with water and wind. Now it's transforming again. The sage consumes the light of his ancestors and his breakfast too. To honor what he consumes he ignites himself and lights up in all four dimensions, consuming the past and present and licking at tomorrow. Life is a fountain of well-informed light and spirit is how well it forms.
30.0, Arising Meriting persistence Fulfillment Attend to the cow Promising
Existence means to stand out, while standing upon what upholds us, to be free in a forward direction, while dependent on all of our sources. As sun and moon cling to heaven and the living things to earth, as life must turn on nature and each thing in its turn be eaten, as the flame needs the logs to transform in order to free more light, so does the brightest of sages rely upon his darker depths, simpler conditions and the body that fools call a house for the soul. Thus he is seen hard at work, attending to his less spectacular nature, not above chopping wood, unashamed to carry water, the visionary leader of a herd of cows. When it is one with the work, spirit becomes a verb. The debt to place and source is honored with liberation, a debt to background best paid by standing out from it, like the oriole stands out against the winter's tree. Yet flames go out when they go beyond their connections and networks of sources. Emanation, upon further reflection, merely describes one of many directions in time. The height of the flame in time is the length of the moment and darkness is only a promise that life is ready to light up and go. It's no wonder the flame likes to dance.
233

30.M, Key Words Radiate, diversify, individuate, glow, distinguish self; depart, go on; energy cycles Fire, flame, light, ignition, sunlight, beauty, radiance; transformational processes Coherence, moment, presence, attention, sentience, intelligence, enlightenment Dependence on fuel, relying on place and conditions; photosynthesis, metabolism Temporally conditioned consciousness, dependent arising; appearances, seeming Inherent in & adhering to conditions; instance, existence, articulation; continuum
30.G, From the Glossary li2 (to) rise, arise, radiate, diverge, separate, contrast, depart, differ, digress, part, get distance, distinguish (from, out of); articulate, leave, spread out, stand out, move on, abandon, choose (one), decide, part, cut, divide, distribute, arrange, set out, pass on, pass through, hang down, hang from (s, ed, ing); (to be) distinct, different, diverse, diversified, divided, separated, off, away (from), distant, apart (from), without; pendant, dependent, dispersed, independent (of); (a, the) arising, rearising, departure, removal, distinction, divergence, division, separation, distance, difference (from); radiance, display, fire, flame, firelight, highlight; net; vis a vis each other; a bird, esp. an oriole (colorful contrast); figure ground relationships; the root of the English word "existence" is to stand out or stand forth; "When Li birds sing, silk worms grow" (Shuowen)
30.T, Tuan Zhuan Arising
(Means) to be conditioned The sun (and) moon (are) conditioned upon heaven The hundreds of grasses, the plants
(and) the trees are conditioned upon the earth Doubled clarity, accordingly, (is) conditioned upon the true Then transformation completes (all things) under heaven The flexible (is) conditioned upon the central (and) correct Given this, fulfillment And so it is that to care for the cow (is) promising
234

30.1, 1st 9, Z hi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
(Fan Yao 56.1: wanderer fussy, annoying, courting suffering)
Taking steps but seeming confused Respect this And avoid errors
30.1x Taking steps in confusion (but) respecting this: Thereby to avoid errors The past has brought us this far. Now the dawn lights up a new land, to which this long, winding path has led. What a thing to wake up to: a tangled network of trails, footsteps and tracks, cryptic glyphs of human direction, and few clues to which ones brought us here. Must we know where we were to know where we are? Or where we are going? Tracking yourself means going nowhere in circles: the outcome is right where we stand. Can't we simplify things if we limit the field of study? If we make the past a summary, pause in our search to ask for directions, admit our ignorance, ask someone who has been here and respect the place to which we have come as the place to start out for the future? Another way to learn where we are is simply to go someplace new, leaving some of ourselves behind for all the learning that lies ahead.
30.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.2: great wagon for loading, have somewhere to go)
Golden radiance Most promising
30.2x Golden radiance (is) most promising: Finding the middle path The sunny disposition is not wrong about having it all, or about letting all of it go. Sunshine is not just a way to talk about life: life is sunshine reborn. Life is a light which has now found ways to light up even at night. The mind is a flame from the sky. Awareness is light which once was locked deep in the sun. So what, then, of the shadows and the darkness and doubt? Is there enough credibility here to scoff at the sunny one's optimism? Or to say that a golden radiance has less than a beaming face value? Let us not talk about optimism: this wants to defend itself with denial. But talk instead about optimizing, how to make and take the most value from life. Light is what makes value: the sun's gold is no different than light which bounces off treasure. Give it away: you never see the light that something keeps for itself.
235

30.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao 21.3: biting into preserved meat, encounter decay)
The sun declines with its radiance Not drumming on clay pots and singing Leads to much of old age's lament Unfortunate
30.3x The sun declines with its radiance: Why should this be prolonged? He sits on his porch, watching the sun set, dimming his mood with the darkening light, sighing: Yea, the sun must go down, and so all that I am must also go down. He's going gently and fading fast and soon will be a burden. It is truly unfortunate to fail to see all of this gold, and not bounce some of it back with a livelier response. He is still young enough to not know this age, to bang on his kettles and pots and sing his fool head off. Instead, he groans pitifully like a man in his eighties. Might he be running a fever here, heating his being to get rid of some foreign thing, such as a thought badly timed? Could he think this day's light has grown old and rotten? To the east and the west a new day dawns, saying goodbye to the stars now coming his way. Why not enjoy today's blessings now? Savor death and decrepitude later.
30.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.4: pure white, winged horse, a suitor, not a robber)
What a breakthrough this one's arrival appears! What a blaze! What an ending! What a waste ...
30.4x What a breakthrough this one's arrival appears: (But) having no place to fit in His coming is sudden and dazzling, flaming and swift, like a meteor. An otherwise placid tableau is brilliantly lit for a moment. The crowds in attendance go wild with frenzied applause. Word spreads of the next spectacular thing. Then he uses up all of his resource and substance, flames up and dies out in darkness. The crowds now return to their various lives, with only a dim recollection of seeing a lovely, bright light somewhere. The theater's senile custodian comes plodding across the stage to sweep up the ashes, whistling absently. So much for the flaming success, or the meteoric rise, or flames using nothing more solid than glamour for fuel. What then was the purpose of this? Will one great showing redeem a whole life? Were there pretty women to please? Great matters fuel great flames: seek fuel, not brightness.
236

30.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.5: tears into laughter, armies entertain each other)
Gushing tears, streaming like water What grief and lament! Good fortune!
30.5x Six fifth's good fortune: A departure from sovereign (and) patriarch He takes on the world's great sorrows, the suffering, craving, blindness and waste, the failure of his own human kind to wake up and enkindle each other, and the most stubborn will with which humans cling to their ignorance, while everyone gnaws on everyone else, and all of those organizations we had so much hope for just turn into cancers and parasites. Not much to cheer up the lone soul. But every great one, and every bright light, will have many nights as dark as this one and will waste a lot of tears on things which will be transcended. Relief is on the way, as the tears will clean the eyes. They come through these nights with dawning awareness of fuel beyond wildest dream and reasons to shine today: if not you, then who, if not now, when? Light which learns is power. The suffering is optional, but swamp gas burns as well.
30.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.6: screening self and family, three years not seen)
The sovereign takes advantage of emergencies to expedite There will be commendations And severed heads The captives were never his enemies Not a mistake
30.6x The sovereign takes advantage of emergencies to expedite: In order to set right the domain Triumph comes at last at the end of a long, bloody struggle, a moment of truth and reckoning, as well as a happy occasion. There is much of what had gone wrong to be set right here today. The Lord will demand a few severed heads, the same heads which should have seen this day coming. But beyond this are the new tasks at hand and now he needs all the help he can get from those he now stands above. With all the bigger tyrants now gone, the only half-innocent followers and failures at being effectively guilty are pardoned. This is the worst time for resentment and retribution. The moment of victory means laws and mandates all change, and so he makes this sweeping gesture. The past can be changed at will when better things need to begin. The grateful parade of new citizens will do better rebuilding than a trail of slaves.
237

30, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 29, Kan, Exposure qian gua (inverse): 30. Li, Arising jiao gua (reverse): 30, Li, Arising (chong gua 5) hu gua (nuclear): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
30, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Tipareth in Atziluth * Tarot: Six of Wands * Astrology: Sol in Fire
30, Quotations * Psychological history of the concept `subject.' The body, the thing, the whole construed by the eye, awaken the distinction between a deed and a doer; the doer, the cause of the deed, conceived ever more subtly, finally left behind the `subject.' Our bad habit of taking a mnemonic, an abbreviated formula, to be an entity, finally as a cause, e.g., saying of lightning `it flashes'. Or the little word `I.' To make a kind of perspective in seeing the cause of seeing: this was what happened in the invention of the subject, the I. --Nietzsche, Will to Power * I seem to be a verb. --Buckminster Fuller * We burn daylight. --Shakespeare, Merry Wives of Windsor * There is no nature at an instant. --A. N. Whitehead * Sunshine proves its own existence. --Arabic proverb * All flesh is grass. (Not intended to be this profound) --Isaiah 40:6 * With Divine light the natural life is no obstacle to the eternal light ... . knowledge, with the power to apply it, that is the eternal light. --Meister Eckhart * I am part of the sun as my eye is part of me. That I am part of the earth my feet know perfectly, and my blood is part of the sea. There is not any of me that is alone and absolute except my mind, and we shall find that the mind has no existence by itself, it is only the glitter of the sun on the surfaces of the water. --D. H. Lawrence
238

GUA 31, XIAN2, RECIPROCITY
Binary 001 110 = 14; Gen below, Dui above
31.X, Overall Image Up on the mountain there is a lake Reciprocity The noble young one, accordingly, is open to welcome the other
First the stillness, then the joy; first the poise, then the pleasure. What belongs in a lowlier place finds itself exalted, crags normally harsh and cold are softened in the clouds and mist, rained on until they flower. A beauty waits and wants to be loved beside the alpine lake. One cannot be self-satisfied here: the two will complete and enrich each other. Joy is held up high. The wise will put preoccupation aside, and be open to joy by their readiness. To put the other first now is the way to meet one's own needs as well. For what it is that she needs, the attractive one will bring peace. Strength yields for this, not to this, humbling itself. The already-full gain nothing.
31.0, Reciprocity Fulfillment Rewarding to persist To court the young woman* is promising
Life grew up with the earth. Ages before these mountains were young, most of the beings had already learned to team up and pair off. Such an ancient alchemy knew how to make new life - out of interacting with others. Now some forms of thought have appeared and they claim to be wiser than this, possessed of a subtler science. But even these won't mistake eros for frivolous force. At least they make it a devil. Beyond simple union, beyond putting our fractured, fragmented selves back together as viable, functioning wholes, there might be no other purpose or plan. Every human being alive has a myriad generations of human and near-human ancestors to thank for bringing them here, not to mention the primates and far longer lines of descent. Each of these beings, in turn, had something to give in exchange for something they wanted. Each self struck a bargain with other, to negotiate a new pairing while acting in what they hoped was their own best interest. Each had to take a lover. Life learned long ago that the self by itself is extinguished. It learned to want and desire, and that it would need to merit its rewards and fulfillments. This is what brings out our best.
239

31.M, Key Words Mutuality, symbiosis, interactions, convergence, coalition, congress, in concert Sharing, embrace, affinity; persuasion, influence, incentives, interest, affection Complements, healthy combinations, right for each other, compelling fulfillment Congress for mutual purposes, teamwork; coming together, resonating with others Eros, attraction, sensuality, stimulation, prompting, arousal, stirrings, response Common interests, meeting each other's needs, valence bonding, synergy, dyad
31.G, From the Glossary xian2 (to be) joined, conjoined, united (in, with), in touch with; moved, touched, persuaded (in, by); together, altogether, all, every, mutual, shared, concordant, convergent, integrated, complete, full, finished; everywhere; (to) feel, sense; join, conjoin, unite, put together, reciprocate, touch, come into contact, move, embrace, share, come together, convene, converge, complete (s, ed, ing) (in, with, together); (a, the) feeling, sensation (s); persuasion, reciprocity, mutuality; entirely, fully, completely, wholly; (also used for gan, 3232, to stimulate, influence, attract)
31.T, Tuan Zhuan Reciprocity
(Means) being moved The flexible (is) above while the firm (is) below
The two vital forces (are) moved in resonance (And) with this support each other
Stillness and enjoyment The masculine submits to the feminine And so it is that fulfillment rewards persistence (And) to court the young woman (is) promising Heaven (and) earth move each other
And so the myriad beings transform (and) come to life The wise ones move the human heart
And all under heaven respond with peace Comprehend this function of touch Then heaven (and) earth (and) the myriad beings
Will now have natures (which) may be seen plainly
240

31.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.1: wrapped with golden rawhide)
Persuaded in one's big toe
31.1x Persuaded in one's big toe: The destination lies elsewhere He gets itchy feet at the first thought of stimulus. He imagines sensations to come and his toes start to curl in early delight. The idea is very compelling. If only there were no rules. If his toes were hooves he would not be so timid and hesitant. Alas, he is human, encumbered instead with a soul to keep clean, and humans rehearse all their pleasures and joys. At least his will has shown the first signs of movement, and his thought has support from his flesh. These might be good, first vital signs, if you don't count the look in those wild, desperate eyes. These do not send clear signals. And to travel a distance by curling the toes will give such inadequate chase to the playmate who skips on ahead. The question is when to let go, to let attractive force take you. Dare I? Should I? Can I? No, you cannot, if you tie yourself down.
31.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness In Excess
(Fan Yao 28.2: older gentleman finds himself a maiden to marry)
Persuaded in one's legs Disappointing To abide is timely
31.2x Even though disappointing, to abide (is) timely: Acceptance does no harm He has waited long enough. His legs spring into action, forward and back, without a great plan; he must get some of this right away and some of that for later. He lets himself be moved, but only gets carried away, pacing the floor, or bouncing his feet, or walking it off in his sleep. Yes, the force is extraordinary, but it's only on general alert. A direction only shows itself in wear and tear on the rug. The force behind this movement is real, and it's as vast as it seems. It drives the tribes through the ages. If it grows bored it can make a two-headed creature; it evolved the human brain and half of human culture; it tests itself against chaos itself. Life wants to make more of itself. We are thus on permanent standby, as eager for chances here as for food. But progress isn't made by movement alone: we need to have something to offer as well.
241

31.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.3: what a gathering, what complaints, embarrassing)
Persuaded in one's loins Managing those consequences To continue thus is wretchedness
31.3x Persuaded in one's loins: But less than secure * The purpose lies in pursuing another The position holds onto the inferior There is nothing mutual here. Responses lead, not the stimuli; desire is followed, but not chosen first. When the will pursues what should follow, things become less. Yes this is chasing tail, no matter whose. This leadership evolved to point the way to truth, but today truth has moved, to deep behind the beloved's eyes. All of love and all flesh is sacred: it has that nerve, along which travels the spirit. And love is respect for the spirit looking back. This is not the problem: wrongness comes with being a slave and making objects of subjects. Best is the love of a partner, the next best is to dream love for spirit. Last is the masterful love of a puppet: this thing is best left in the closet. One works instead on attractive behavior, on having things to give worth receiving, on being a worthy find. This is love going head and heart first.
31.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
(Fan Yao* 39.4: if going is impassable, then coming is alliance)
Persistence is promising Regrets pass If unsettled and vacillating in whether to go or come Your alliances will conform to your thinking*
31.4x Persistence (is) promising, regrets pass: (Being) less than excited by trouble * (To be) unsettled (and) ambivalent (in whether) to go (or) come (Is) less than distinguished (for) greatness Ambivalence might be better than apathy, but this still wanders all over the place. Whether he might be coming or going is not known at this time. Movements can cancel each other out, so others wait to see, to measure a net progress here. A higher order of purpose can make both advance and retreat serve our lives in the forward directions, while a lower purpose or lack of direction can travel much and go only nowhere or backwards. Friends and alliances pick this up too, and none but those inescapably bound are inclined to follow in circles - and least of all those partners we may want to attract. Mixed signals are also easy to read, but the message is still all wrong and signals will not make a dialogue. It is clarity in what you want and in what you have to give that gives the purpose both firmness and appearance of health.
242

31.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness In Excess
(Fan Yao 62.5: prince hunts birds in cave, with tethered arrows)
Moved in one's neck and shoulders Avoiding regrets
31.5x Moved in one's neck and shoulders: The purpose (is) trivial Maybe he fears getting shot down in flames: one simple no has all the destructive force of the world's greatest hyperbole. So he thinks it over, all over again, naming the ninety-nine ramifications and deciding on higher love, which looks more like an arm's length friendship, except for occasional backrubs to work out the tensions. The forbidden excitement levels diminish; things move from the coarse to sublime. All those disturbing juices go elsewhere, around a cool and neutral heart, to chill the higher minds. So why do the neck and shoulders still seize, and need all those rubs? Why does this still happen so often, as though the excess of caution and fear were still there? No great or lesser ape would write letters, then tear them up. A monkey's business is not thinking over or through. Better to hear a no and get on to the new.
31.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.6: resourceful retreat, nothing not advantageous)
Moved in one's jawbones and tongue
31.6x Moved in one's jawbones (and) tongue: Gushing (with) oral persuasion No heaving bosoms or throbbing loins here! The silver-tongued devil talks small, smooth and fast. He prattles away in the tavern, with a fine, saucy wench on each knee. But take away the gestures, the flattery and the fashions and not much with substance remains. There are no intriguing voids and silences left: these were all quickly filled in. There are no tempting depths to dive into here. Though some facts get stated, in something like logical order, there is more misdirection than purpose. Maybe they each might go home alone, to set down their thoughts about love and attraction. But this will be all that survives of this night. So what is the point of the exercise? What wild screams of delight could come from these same throats, if they only came from a lot deeper down. Life wants so much to live more than halfway.
243

31, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 41, Sun, Decreasing qian gua (inverse): 32, Heng, Continuity jiao gua (reverse): 41, Sun, Decreasing hu gua (nuclear): 44, Gou, Dissipation shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
31, Notes * 31.0 This Gua uses eros and libido as a general metaphor for the will to interact with the world and live a fertile existence. * 31.4 This line is too often misunderstood in its "easier" translation of: "Friends are following your thoughts." This is usually thought to refer to a superstitious belief related to telepathy or subliminal communication. What the line is really saying is: to the extent that one's personal orientation in life is chaotic, one's relationships will reflect this randomness. This idea is especially important in the fan yao, 39.4, where the subject is in more of a guidance or leadership position. Xiao Xiang 31.4 uses the word Guang, exemplary.
31, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Briah of Atziluth * Tarot: Queen of Pentacles * Astrology: Virgo Ascending, Mutable Earth
31, Quotations * No, one body does not diminish beneath another. There is no amorous oil to lose. The woman bathing in her blue pool renews not her flesh but her readiness. --John Hawkes * Eunuchs, abortive Platonists and priests speak always very wisely about love. --Theodore Spencer * Chastity is the most unnatural of the sexual perversions. --De Gourmont * All argument will vanish before one touch of nature. --George Coleman * If our elaborate and dominating bodies are given to us to be denied at every turn, if our nature is always wrong and wicked, how ineffectual we are - like fishes not meant to swim. --Cyril Connolly * All real living is meeting. --Martin Buber * To be fruitful the spirit must be wife. Spouse is the noblest title of the spirit, nobler than virgin. For a man to receive the Divine within him is good, and in receiving he is virgin. But for the divine to be fruitful in him is still better. --Meister Eckhart
244

GUA 32, HENG2, CONTINUITY
Binary 011 100 = 28; Xun below, Zhen above
32.X, Overall Image Thunder and wind Continuity The noble young one, accordingly,
makes a stand without changing bearings
The storm seems like drastic change to those confined to one place: first it comes and then it goes. But the storm merely moves, it wanders the earth, always behaving like climate, always a timely expression of timeless seasons. Its energy conserved through the changes, it is never really exhausted. It connects to the ever-enduring and so it never runs out of motion. Even the doldrums and the motionless eyes of the storms are part of its moving force. The wise, like the storm, connect with the ever-enduring. Therefore, to stand firm, or to hold a direction, means balance and adaptation. All one might keep is the long term goal, or a bearing or higher purpose.
32.0, Continuity Fulfillment Nothing is wrong Worthwhile to be persistent Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
Only some things that humans now do will still be unchanged in ten thousand years. To persist, survive or continue means learning and changing, being open to power and change, and turning, with these, to advantages. Thoughts, and other things with sharp edges, do not do well against time if they don't get refreshed and rebuilt now and then. We like to think of our conscious minds, or selves, as continuous beings, although once a night they seem to be nowhere at all. We like to think of our spirits surviving through time, but who can say where one goes between lifetimes? What thread through time is this entity? Between yourself and your cells, what is it that you reduce to or keep? What will cohere or repeat? What truly needs to continue? The moon seems to go through radical phases, yet in our lifetimes, it really hardly changes at all. Ways of living or methods of coping are passed down from being to being, like we pass torches and titles. This process life has for learning endures. We are what remains of that plucky, old lungfish who first crawled up onto shore. Some of that fellow endures. We persist by adaptation, not by remaining the same.
245

32.M, Key Words Continuing, surviving, lasting, endurance, steadiness; adaptability, sustainability Duration, protraction, longevity, persistence, coherence across time, consistency Regularity, constancy, stability, maturity, integrity, proficiency, learned versatility Self-renewal, self-regeneration, self-succession; the long run; alignment, meetness Keeping to path or vow, holding true throughout outer changes, dynamic balance Perseverance, not always predictability or a sameness; resourcefulness, resilience
32.G, From the Glossary heng2 (a, the) duration, continuity, continuance, endurance, steadiness, constancy, consistency, longevity, sustainability; (what, that which) endures, survives; (to be) regular, enduring, lasting, chronic, continuing, persistent, persisting, continuous, perennial, perpetual, prolonged, constant, throughout; (to) last in, go on, endure (changes), continue, persevere, stay, perpetuate, prolong (s, -ed, -ing); constantly, lastingly, persistently, always, continuously, regularly, perseveringly
32.T, Tuan Zhuan Continuity
(Means) to endure The firm (is) above and the flexible (is) below Thunder (and) wind support each other Versatile and energetic The firm (and) the flexible fully correspond Continuity Continuity fulfills (and) nothing (is) wrong, Worthwhile to be persistent: Enduring (is) upon one's own path Heaven's (and) earth's courses Continue, going on and (on) without end Worthwhile to have somewhere to go: At the end, in due order, there will be a beginning Sun and moon take the sky
and so (are) able to continue in brilliance The four seasons evolve (and) turn
And so are able to continue accomplishing The wise ones endure upon their paths
And all under heaven (is) transformed (and) completed Comprehend what is meant to be continued Then heaven (and) earth (and) the myriad beings
Will now have natures (which) may be seen plainly
246

32.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
(Fan Yao 34.1: powerful in toes, boldness bad for confidence)
Digging in to continue Persistence has pitfalls Not a direction with merit
32.1x Digging in for continuity has pitfalls: At the beginning (and) searching for depth Endurance works best with an optimum pace, set for the distance to travel. This one can hardly endure the beginning. Wanting to last a long time in a hurry, he makes a big, first ditch effort. He digs himself in to get stable, and entrenches himself in his premature notions. He wants this marathon effort to be over soon, and so he sprints, takes shortcuts and jumps to conclusions. But life is the means, not the end. Death is the end and why hurry that grave situation? A grave is only a hole in the ground with one more side than the one he now digs. This is not having somewhere to go. One who has done this can no longer go anywhere, with no long term or long run. Have a good idea? Let's make it a law or a rut! Need to know who you are? There are pigeonholes and cubbyholes to squeeze into. The skipped steps aren't progress.
32.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess
(Fan Yao 62.2: pass ancestor, chief, meet grandmother, aide)
Regrets pass
32.2x Nine second's regrets pass: The ability to continue (is) in the middle If these regrets are all that is left now of events you think should have made better memories, is it anywhere near second best to possess them? If such regrets do not endure then why should they be clung to? Does not the long road ahead suggest in some small way moving on? Regret is just a signpost. You would not stay stopped where a sign says to stop. You pause and process the thing, then go forward. What you learn from regret might continue and allow you to rebuild your life with what might not pass. This will continue when you do. Duration is not about staying the same, just the staying the course if this fits your true nature. To win some and lose some is life. To succeed and make errors is life. To dwell instead on things which need leaving behind is not living. Living is discontinued until the reliving is over.
247

32.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.3: shouldering baggage but riding, inviting robbers)
Lacking continuity in one's character Somehow continuing in such unworthiness What persists is embarrassment
32.3x Lacking continuity in one's character: Nowhere to be endured We study our lives and make up plans for our past, to sort what we are from what we are not. We seem inclined to draw lines of connection between all of our most shining moments, like a great string of luminous pearls. But we tend to leave out those actual things which may not shine so brightly, as well as our dark spots, our shadows and secrets and shames. Duration does not have these long interruptions: it tracks the paths which we travel in fact. It is so very easy to make improvements on who we think we are and then come to believe that we shine all the time. But this does not fool our fellows or peers. A viable theory of who and what you might be wants to account for all of the facts, including the great gaps of dullness and dark. Consistency is the ethical substance. The unreliable substance will not be endured.
32.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.4: sovereign makes offerings at Mt. Chi; opportune)
A hunt without game
32.4x Chronically out of one's context Where is game (to be) found? The game has missed its appointment with destiny. He might be the finest archer, with an unsurpassed aim for his targets, and yet be the poorest hunter if he sees the game in his mind's eye but stalks it in empty fields. The hunter must also track and find. To be a seeker of a truth isn't enough to hunt wisdom. Truth sometimes must be made to come true. The appropriate move depends on what needs appropriating. To be a finder and come home with nourishing meals, look to the real conditions and contexts, where threads, traces, tracks and trails leave clues. The ideals will not leave such tracks, nor do they do much for hunger. Knowledge can go either way but wisdom is always applied. Knowledge might hunt where bushes are not, only in order to see things more clearly. Mind in the field needs to ask better questions.
248

32.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
(Fan Yao* 28.5: older woman finds herself a young man to marry)
To continue in one's character means persistence For a woman of maturity, promising For a man in youth, disappointment*
32.5x (For) a woman (of) maturity, persistence (is) promising: To follow one through to completion * (For) a man (in) youth, restraint (is) advised: To follow the women (is) trouble To persevere and persist means to survive and adapt. Since adaptation is always to some kind of context, sometimes this will mean changing and sometimes staying the same. The appropriate response is one which allows us to last. And so the one may become predictable who would build a stable home, while the next becomes adaptable to succeed in the changing world. Each one develops a character in order to endure, but even though this becomes second nature, it still remains first nature that is striving to continue. Consistency is more than adopting predictable patterns of acting. Even the simplest characters have many facets and sides. In a world that keeps changing and showing us different sides, it is only fair to reciprocate when it suits our own best interests. There are times to be tricky and times to be known.
32.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.6: cauldron's jade grip, nothing not advantageous)
Continuously stimulated Unfortunate
32.6x Continuously stimulated at the top: Greatly lacking in merit Sleeping and waking, loss and gain, darkness and light: each pair is a pair of points to be found on a greater continuum. For someone being continuous, then, there may still be some room to change back and forth. Rest and movement are kindred points. Someone does not need to be either one or the other in order to continue. A restless condition cannot be sustained, the constant pressure cannot be endured. One simply burns up or boils away, or blows off steam in all the wrong places. It might not be so important to adhere to a middle way. In fact it might be quite boring: this is only the average path of those things enjoying both sides. The thundering winds seem so restless, unwearied by their years. But the winds are not only driven by pressure's highs, they are also drawn by its lows. Two are not really two if in the continuum.
249

32, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 42, Yi, Increasing qian gua (inverse): 31, Xian, Reciprocity jiao gua (reverse): 42, Yi, Increasing hu gua (nuclear): 43, Guai, Decisiveness shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
32, Notes * 32.5 This may be the most explicit of all of the Yi's fan yao references, and still it goes unnoticed. For who the woman and man are, see the yao ci at 28.5.
32, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Atziluth of Yetzirah * Tarot: King of Swords * Astrology: Libra Ascending, Cardinal Air
32, Quotations * For a conscious being, to exist is to change, to change is to mature, to mature is to go on creating oneself endlessly. --Henri Bergson * No well informed person has declared a change of opinion to be inconstancy. --Cicero * Never do anything against conscience, even if the state demands it. --Einstein * We set up a word at the point at which our ignorance begins, at which we can see no further, e.g. the words ` I' ` do' ` suffer.' --Nietzsche, WTP * You did not come into this world You came out of it Like a wave comes out of the ocean You are not a stranger here. --Alan Watts * The great use of life is to spend it for something that will outlast it. --William James
250

GUA 33, DUN4, DISTANCING
Binary 001 111 = 15
33.X (Gen below, Qian above) Beneath the sky is a mountain Distancing The noble young one, accordingly,
is distant from the common people Not with ill will, but with reserve
The mountain stands high against the horizon, but heaven is not diminished by this. The human mind can open up to unthinkable distance and scale. From atop the peak, or other places above, there is little that seems like an obstacle, though progress may still mean changing directions. Given just a bit more perspective we can alter the size of anything. Given the larger frames to refer to we can put things in smaller places. Given broad choices in new points of view we can see things from different angles. The wise might use all of these options, even to be aloof and not accessible, even to avoid any issues they want to avoid, to reserve themselves for adventures of value.
33.0, Distancing Success Little reward in persistence
Backing away to get the big picture, or at least a broader perspective, even the great mountain shrinks. When we have a big need to move ourselves forward we have a small trick to play: we make our goals seem big and important. But sometimes we forget we can do this backwards too, since backwards might not look like progress. By adjusting the relative size of things we can find the perfect distance. We can go to places where problems are manageably small, but not so reduced in importance that solutions are overlooked. Success will go where success is best. If this means being elsewhere, then staying here is not so good or smart. If we need to escape we progress by moving backwards. This will go somewhat more quickly if first we can turn around. This needs no repulsive force, we need not to be taken aback, we need not first be unhappy in the place we wish to leave, nor do we need the aloofness. We need to do nothing more than change our minds and start off in some new direction, one recently renamed forward. Craving and aversion both harm. It is you, not things, not going your way. Error will blunder forth, but persistence is not a virtue in error.
251

33.M, Key Words To retreat, step back, detach; strategic pullback, withdrawal, neutrality, abstention Issues of freedoms from and to; retire a debt; retirement, sabbatical, sabbath, rest Seclusion, refuge, sanctuary, asylum, reserve, haven, safe distance, out of reach Retraction, resignation, quitting claim; inaccessibility, discretion, disengagement Escaping, transcending, reframing; taking a larger point of view, a bigger picture Neutralizing, letting go, standing down, stepping back, getting away, evasiveness 33.G, From the Glossary dun4 (to) retreat, withdraw, retire, escape, evade, avoid, flee, hide away, withdraw from, get distance from, step back (from), run away, abscond, skulk, hide; drag the feet in walking (s, ed, ing); (a, the) retirement, retreat, reservation, sanctuary; distance, distancing, withdrawal; [reframing]; (to be) hidden, concealed, evasive, withdrawn, invisible, secluded 33.T, Tuan Zhuan Distancing succeeds:
Get distance and then succeed The firm (is) suitably placed and resonant
To partake in the seasons' progress Little reward (in) persistence:
[The flexible] penetrates and then prevails Distancing's proper timing (is) very important here!
252

33.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.1: fellowship with others at the gate, not a mistake)
Withdrawing the tail in trouble Not at all useful to have somewhere to go
33.1x Withdrawing the tail comes to have troubles: (If) not in motion, where is the crisis? Only moments ago he was leading this charge, but then he got himself too advanced before the new call for retreat. Now all of the timid are found at the vanguard, along with the foresighted sage. Now he heads up the rear guard, trying to cover his tail, leading the wrong crowd forward. This makes him as bait for unwanted attentions, the loose ends that need tying up. Now he is left alone to face the thing that turned his whole group around. When someone is this completely surrounded, any move in any direction is moving far too far forward. Maybe it's best to fade a little faster than hope, withdraw all the outward signs and become a part of the scenery. A shrub or a stone might be good, anything nobody wants. Or else he could look like a scout for the foe and show them which way he ran off to. The average can be a fine retreat.
33.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.2: creel holds fish, not wrong not serving guests)
Tie it up with yellow rawhide No one succeeds in getting it loose
33.2x Bound with yellow cow(hide): Firmness (of) purpose It is time to leave in a hurry. He knows that he can't take everything with him. Alas, he has a fine thing that he must leave behind. A good thing is hard to come by these days and he knows a good thing when he sees one. It disgusts him so to think of his wonderful thing in the hands of inferior people, so he makes his thing inaccessible, that it might be there upon his return. It makes him feel so secure to know that his thing is secure. But he has to tie it up well, and tie it to something immobile: those loose ends are also good handles. And maybe he ought not to make it look precious. This may not be much of a problem, until the cost of his worries exceeds the worth of the thing, or unless he makes his thing so secure he deprives himself of its use. Too much insurance may show too little perspective. And none of this is freedom.
253

33.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 12: Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.3: embracing the unworthy)
Entangled retreat There will be anxiety and distress To manage one's servants and concubines would have been timely.
33.3x Entangled retreat has distress, There will be anxiety (and) exhaustion * Managing (one's) servants (and) concubines
(would have been) timely: But not suited to crucial concerns His retreat is nerve-racking and tangled. The orders to evacuate were given long ago. The city's defenses crumble. Barbarians march up the street. He should have been gone long ago, with his retinue firmly in tow, already safe in his mountain retreat. But he still runs around the house in distress, helping his servants to pack up their things, helping his concubines pick out the right clothes. The complexities here want something more expeditious: great affairs are not dealt with this way. Alhough his caring for them is commendable, he's supposedly some kind of leader, at least in a minor capacity. He still lacks the proper perspective and the distance to lead them all to success. This is not time for fraternity and equality, or micromanagement either. Conditions need a master and a master needs to do triage, bid them follow, then go.
33.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.4: goose advances to trees, to find a flat branch)
Elective retreat The noble young one's opportunity The common people deny
33.4x The noble young one chooses retreat (While) common people deny Knowing which way to face in retreat is knowing how to save face. Young nobles want spine and self-rule. When compelling reasons to go become known, those of noble character choose what they want, then elect to sever their ties in some manner permitting return. Then they rise, and say their goodbyes, and then go. Of course it might be noticed that they have changed their minds, and of course they might still love what they leave. Now those of a lesser character must take a more difficult route and things can get much more complex. First they must make themselves unhappy, in order to make those around them unhappy. This festers awhile, then it makes the whole situation reject them. This is just like acne or boils: out they pop like pimples. This is how disease works. It's becoming an inanimate thing, not owning choices.
254

33.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
(Fan Yao 56.5: hunt pheasant, an arrow for praise and office)
Commendable retreat Persistence is promising
33.5x Commendable retreat's persistence (is) promising: By staying true to objectives Exploratory behavior might try to get close enough to see where mistakes can be made. It aims to find out exactly where it can go with its freedoms. One expects to back up, turn around or go sideways when the limits of freedom are reached. One should not expect perfect foresight when wandering in unexplored realms. And if you learn that you do not belong anymore, you simply retreat, maybe admit some mistakes and be gracious. If you need to travel lightly, wits are the finest provisions, not baggage and entanglements. One departs with a rightness of purpose and a long road ahead, head high, eyes forward, onward to all those new vistas, with letters of recommendation, nothing severed or otherwise injured, no losses and gains to need balancing. This is a retreat without any sense of escape. This is retreating forward.
33.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.6: moved in one's jawbones and tongue)
Resourceful retreat Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
33.6x Resourceful retreat, nothing cannot be turned to advantage: Having no reason to doubt Since it seems there is no could-have-been, it seems too that all of the steps to this present were needed, even if not a part of some silly deity's plan. And so this path has come to an end, or at least to one serious change in direction. From the school which would make you a scholar, the tavern which drove you to drink, or the tyrant who would have you play soldier, what will you take away with you? What do you do while on the way out? Do you need the parting words or shots? If this was a path which has just doubled back on itself, then nothing is over yet and your part is still in play. The timid retreat going backwards, recounting successes and failures, as if they had made no decision. The point is not freedom from, but to. And detachment is from aversion and craving, not from living a life. Opportunities also lie in retreat.
255

33, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 19, Lin, Taking Charge qian gua (inverse): 34, Da Zhuang, Big and Strong jiao gua (reverse): 26, Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts hu gua (nuclear): 44, Gou, Dissipation shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 6th Moon (Jul)
33, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Chesed in Yetzirah * Tarot: Four of Swords * Astrology: Jupiter in Air
33, Quotations * A man is rich in proportion to the number of things he can afford to let alone. --Thoreau * Despising, for you, the city, thus I turn my back: there is a world elsewhere. --Shakespeare, Coriolanus * Men of great wisdom, looking at things far off or near at hand, do not think them insignificant for being small nor unwieldy for being great. --Zhuangzi * They who apply themselves too closely to little things often become incapable of great things. --Francois de la Rochefoucald * What better faith can a man have than to refuse to die for the things he believes in? --Kenneth Patchen * A feeling for the faraway is at the same time one for history. At a distance space becomes time and the horizon means the future. --Spengler * Il faut reculer pour mieux sauter. --Montaigne * If you are near the enemy, make him believe you are far from him. If you are far from the enemy, make him believe you are near. --Sunzi, The Art of War
256

GUA 34, DA4 ZHUANG4, BIG AND STRONG
Binary 111 100 = 60; Qian below, Zhen above
34.X, Overall Image Thunder in the sky above Big and strong The noble young one, accordingly, outside of respect,
will not take a step
Great vigor, on top of great strength. With the pure force of heaven behind it, what voice is more mighty than thunder? And yet even when two parts in three are pure strength, if there is no sense of where best to go and what best to do, then the force will not do work and thus it cannot be power. Power will have a proper path, and it is usually on it: it will go where the world opens up to it. It has the sound of doors slamming open. Thunder may be efficient, but only in its aimlessness. Living things want to be more specific, and displace things from place to place, and thus consider efficiencies whenever a choice is involved. They need respect and regard for facts.
34.0, Big and Strong Worthwhile to persist
To persist is not to try to persist. It's to move and succeed in persisting. Success at this will measure its worth. Self-destructive and self-defeating behavior cannot then be power, no matter how much force is applied. Power will find the way to its end. It is hard for a thing to be great if it is not also correct, or obeying the natural laws. Power is not a quantity, or a quantum of force, or a strain in the muscles, a feeling of having one's purpose stressed and resisted: this is force, and no great force at that. Power is the rate at which one slips past all of this, and then succeeds, as the dancer moves with the music's pulse and transforms one thing into another. The wise are not entangled in an identity with force: they will master its clean release. Persistence across and through time is different than pounding and blundering forward: it might even pause to sense some new directions to go, new choices opening up, and so it's a form of intelligence. When force is too blind, or its purpose too narrow, to pause and consider its options, the complicated results of its own simple-minded activity will often be its biggest problems and obstacles. Survival of the fittest means fitting.
257

34.M, Key Words Much, great, full, big, major, extensive + strength, vigor, energy, potency, force Assertion, aggression, self-reliance, tenacity, forging ahead; initiative, purpose To be headstrong, demanding, pushy, obstinate, obsessed, driven; testing a limit Robust, dominant; feedforward, the need for feedback & sense; might needs right Power wanting governing; meta-solutions to problems; problems of tunnel vision, Insight as reorganizing perceptual field; power is really measured by effectiveness
34.G, From the Glossary da4 (to be) accomplished, best, better, big, complete, critical, crucial, developed, enormous, entire, extreme, far, full, fully grown, good, grand, great(er, est), high, heavy, large(r), (very, greatly) important, long, loud, major, mature, mighty, old, more, most, noble, noteworthy, overall, (more, most) perfect, pure, realized, ripe, seasoned, serious, significant, strong, successful, vast, whole, wholesome, vital; a lot of, full of, lots of; master-, (a, the) completeness, (full) development, entirety, grand (-eur, -ness), greatness, growth, (great) importance, largesse, wholeness, vastness, maturity, majority; a great deal, (very) much, very; already, completely, entirely, fully, greatly, thoroughly, wholly, en masse , well-; of (great, crucial, vital) importance zhuang4 (to be) strong, vigorous, forceful, powerful, potent, fertile, big, mighty, large, great, grand, magnificent, stout, able-bodied, healthy, hardy, hearty, virile, full-blown, fully grown, dynamic, robust, fierce, dominant, animated, lively, indomitable in spirit, [alpha] ; (a, the) strength, vigor, energy, force, power, might, potency, prime of life, dominance, fierceness; (to) strengthen, embolden, enliven, encourage, enspirit, invigorate, animate, make better; (grow, wax) strong (s, ed, ing)
34.T, Tuan Zhuan Big (and) strong
Greatness is that which is strong The firm applies force
Hence, strength Big (and) strong, worthwhile to persist:
Greatness implies being correct Be correct in greatness and then heaven (and) earth
Will now have natures (which) may be seen plainly
258

34.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao 32.1: digging in to continue, no merit in direction)
Powerful in the toes To go boldly bodes ill for staying confident
34.1x Powerful in the toes: Such confidence (is soon) exhausted Thinking to go by leaps and bounds, with great and powerful strides, he summons great vigor into his toes. But little is left to power his mind. Were a stone to jump into the path ahead, which heaven does not forbid, it would trip him up before he could think to jump over it. Vigor like this might go a step further and punish that stone with a powerful kick. Two defeats from an unarmed rock will surely lead to loss of self-confidence. What a fate, and not the no-brainer it seems. Might does not make right and impetuousness is not the best source of impetus. It's not the critter who kicks the most butt who persists: the one best fit to its place will have the power to stay. The toes, and kicks too, are great things. The fetus first learns about life by kicking the womb, spending force to see what gives. But brains should co-evolve.
34.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.2: in going, distrust, anxiety, be true, express it)
Persistence is promising
34.2x Nine second's persistence (is) promising: Using balance What is persistence? What does it promise? Persisting is going through to an end and still be standing there. Persevering goes through more severe times to an end and may be barely still standing. But the only promise to trust is that you then get to see what is there at the end. That will also mean you've succeeded. It can also be promised that something important will change between here and there, and that is why persistence should never mean staying the same. One balances the force with restraint. Momentum and inertia are very handy things, but they'll fight any change of direction. Equilibrium is just as important. Look at the the conquering hero who calls up all of his strength to open up a passage, but finds that the door offers little resistance. So he falls mightily flat on his face: a bad way to treat good momentum.
259

34.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.3: marries as bondmaid, turnaround to be 2nd wife)
Ordinary people apply force The noble young one uses his wits* Persistence is trouble The billy goat* butts the hedge Entangling his horns
34.3x Ordinary people apply force: (To) the noble young one, a snare* The goal of the ram or he goat is simple: out, now, and beyond all of this. He throws all of his weight straight at the problem, head first, his headlong rush only numbing his skull even further. This is a bone-headed way to do things. He has lots of nerve, but none in his horns and not much more in his head. Then he exhausts himself in fighting his own entanglements. Horns are not made like antennae, for sensing the new opportunities. Inferior men might spend all of their strength like this, fighting existence first, then the consequences of previous actions. Average men might try a few times, then look for a better way. The wise have rules about this sort of thing: their heads are their friends, not hammers and bludgeons. Just one assassin can win a war that thousands of soldiers lose. The wise use neural nets to get that net result.
34.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.4: fluttering, fussing, don't limit use of sincerity)
Persistence is promising While regrets pass The hedge opens with no entanglement The power in the great vehicle is in its axle's mount
34.4x The hedge opens up with no entanglements: Appreciate going forward The lead man on the battering ram gets the novel idea to give the doorknob a try. The ram might take a bit longer, but he crashes through at last, scrambles back to his hooves and gets free. He will not stop to consider that he might have stumbled by luck onto the weak spot, but will credit the force expended and possibly struggle longer the next time. The ram might never unlearn that force is what works. Power revolves around what works, the finding and opening up of the possible. The wheel might roll with no axle, but it will not take anything with it. And our vehicles are but furniture until their wheels are rolling. Power is in the usefulness, or ability to work. Great power makes use of the still points, axioms, pivotal moments, quiet hearts of a matter and windows of opportunity. The good hub won't squeak, let alone rumble.
260

34.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 43: Guai, Decisiveness
(Fan Yao 43.5: wild greens, dry land, uproot or balance action)
Losing the goat with ease No regrets
34.5x Losing the goat with ease: The position (was) not appropriate The ram bangs away at the fence outside. When all this is followed at long last by silence, the one in the farmhouse pretends not to notice. But the horrible headache soon goes away. Obstinacy might have its uses at times, when clever solutions are scarce. It is harder to lose amidst difficulty. But twice the effort it saves is spent to contain the damned thing when not needed. A little math might weigh cost against benefit and make this loss easy to suffer. Then ram strength immortal can have his green pastures beyond and only serve ewes when he's wanted. They do say that it feels so good when you finally stop banging your head on the wall, but this is no reason to do that. Those brutal and headstrong approaches to living are just beastly things to let go of. But to drop such a hindrance is a great deal like moving forward.
34.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.6: heaven assists, nothing not advantageous)
The billy goat butts the hedge No power to pull back No power to follow through Not a direction with merit But problems give rise to opportunities
34.6x No power to pull back, No power to follow through: Not examining details * Problems give rise to opportunities: The error does not last long The prodigal ram falls back on his old habits, out at that far frontier of his freedom. He has tried to butt his way through a hedge and is caught by his horns on a snag. He cannot go forth and he cannot retreat. He is at his wit's end and didn't get far. It will not be easy for a ram to see that puzzles and obstacles might have different solutions. Even when his horns become hooks he will not be inclined to pause and ponder the problems, or the curve of his horns. He will not be free until he, or the shepherd, or maybe the predator, turns his head around. He can do this indirectly by trying different perspectives, or seeing things from new angles, or questioning old directions, or simply pausing to have a quick look around. Sometimes to find the objective one needs to drop the objective and bring out those other dimensions.
261

34, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 20, Guan, Perspective qian gua (inverse): 33, Dun, Distancing jiao gua (reverse): 25, Wu Wang, Without Pretense hu gua (nuclear): 43, Guai, Decisiveness shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 2nd Moon (Mar)
34, Notes * 34.3: I use ram and billy goat interchangeably in this Gua for di yang. This is permissable: the Chinese text does not distinguish between the two - it can mean either. There is also some word play with wang3 here: it means nets, webs, snares, traps, etc., and also wits, subtlety, trickery.
34, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Malkuth in Assiah * Tarot: Ten of Wands * Astrology: Pluto in Fire
34, Quotations * Power is not revealed by striking hard and often, but by striking true. --Balzac * All power is of one kind, a sharing of the nature of the world. The mind that is parallel with the laws of nature will be in the current of events, and strong with their strength. --Emerson * There is no need to fear the strong. All one needs to know is the method of overcoming them. There is a special jujitsu for every strong man. --Yevgeny Yevtushenko * The hallucination of power corrupts as efficiently as power. --Leonard Wolf * Power, n., The ability or capacity to perform or act effectively ... the rate at which work is done. --American Heritage Dictionary * Flexibility is the most requisite qualification for the management of great affairs. --Jean Francois de Retz * Power resides in the moment of transition from the past to a new state. --Emerson
262

GUA 35, JIN4, EXPANSION
Binary 000 101 = 05; Kun below, Li above
35.X, Overall Image The light rises over the earth Expansion The noble young one, therefore,
naturally radiates clarity of character
The cold but patient earth turns to greet another new day, and welcomes powerful stimulus from its warm and generous star. Light becomes heat and heat becomes activity. The markets and roads come alive. More than light is dawning here. This energy coming into the system not only powers the system: it will organize it too, in the same way that good health will clarify the mind. When energy can circulate freely it tends to articulate a natural order. When human behavior circulates freely it will tend to articulate a natural ethic. When resources and capital circulate freely things may appear like the work of invisible hands.* Light is free and pure income.
35.0, Expansion The prosperous lord* uses grants of horses
to breed a multitude And by the light of a day three times grants audience
The long shadows withdraw, doubts go into hiding. All else has ventured out into the light, already knowing where best to go and what best to do. Economies thaw and the trade is set free. Stagnation burns off in the flames of new wealth. Wealth is now seen as the rate at which the fortunate can give themselves away. Now that which goes around circulates many times over, and all of it comes back multiplied. It's a struggle now to find many losers. The people, now rallied to working together, find that their net is more than their sum. The character of the beings is also a flame. As it is fed and it prospers, the basic needs are met in due order and life is set free to move on to its higher purposes. The prince appears to be generous, giving freely of his wealth to stimulate the new growth, freely of his time to hear some new ideas. And yet his actions still spring from enlightened self-interest. His generosity pays. The culture will grow and evolve as long as the minds which create it stay open and free of censors and meddlers, as long as liberty teaches the ethics. Civilizations enter dark ages when the free flow of information has ceased. Light is the great antiseptic.
263

35.M, Key Words To advance, progress, develop, improve, grow, circulate, open, warm, thaw, dawn Acknowledge, demonstrate; energize; emergence, discovery, disclosure, exposure Enterprise, venture, free markets; learning by way of freedom, liberty, permission Overt, sunny, healthy, vibrant, generous, outgoing; daylight, daytime, sunshine Openness, assent, acknowledgment, opening up, glasnost; present, offer, promote Character, virtu , self-development; growth too temporary, healthy to be parasitic 35.G, From the Glossary jin4 (to) advance, progress, grow, develop, extend, prosper, increase, improve, enter (upon), make progress, lead, introduce, present, insert (s, ed, ing); (to be) forward, advanced, far along; (a, the) growth, advancement, progression, promotion, development 35.T, Tuan Zhuan Expansion
(Means) progress The light rises over the earth
Compliance along with reliance upon great clarity The flexible advances, but with superior conduct And so it is that the prosperous lord uses grants (of) horses
To breed a multitude (And) by the light of a day three times grants audience
264

35.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao 21.1: feet shackled in stocks, hiding toes, no mistake)
So far along to be so frustrated But persistence is promising Use wits for confidence And be tolerant Not a mistake
35.1x So far along (to be) so frustrated: All alone (but) advancing with integrity * To be tolerant is not a mistake: (Having) not yet been given orders Someone needs to start forward here, simply to get things moving. Our hero is one of the first to go forward, a little ahead of his time. He advances to meet the prince, on triple audience day, but he carries no official charge, nor passport, nor invitation. He is halted in his progress, still outside of the kingdom's border, by a guard whose mistrust is a duty. Without the license or status there is not enough light on him yet to be seen as more than a nobody. While he might think of himself as a diplomat, from a short time into the future, he knows that he won't convince the guard that his borders are imaginary. And thus, when halted, he bows, with a sunny and plausible courtesy. He retreats three li.* Then roundabout, in broad daylight, he detours into the kingdom. It was too soon to get permission. Sometimes liberties must be taken.
35.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.2: braking those wheels, persistence is promising)
So far along to be so worried But persistence is promising Accept these present constraints
as if a blessing from one's grandmother
35.2x Accepting these present boundaries (as) a blessing: Applying the central principle No matter how sunny it is, or it might promise to be, we humans in gross are still in the dark about how light and bright we could be. When we speak of free markets and minds, free speech, the free exercise of a faith and even of freedom itself, we are still speaking of aims and ideals which only a few have attained yet, and not many more have even begun to grasp. We might be more evolved than those days when we plucked lice from each other's fur, but we still have a long way to go. Present day limits aside, we will waste this fine daylight if we let our lack of advancement darken our spirits. To find the patience, we need we look back and see how far we have come. Why would we want to collect our rewards when the work and journey have only begun? We'll take gratitude, strength and courage wherever we can get it.
265

35.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
(Fan Yao 56.3: burns their camp, fails helper, hard to persist)
Many liberties Regrets pass
35.3x Many liberties extended: (With) hope for superior conduct There exist clear reasons why the people should seize and secure certain freedoms. It often seems less clear that this will serve the ruler as well. Liberty will even serve the ruler so well that he ought not to wait at all for his people to ask for their rights. There is no better teacher in life than the consequences of actions, so when actions are prohibited the teacher goes away, leaving rumors and laws in its place. Liberty teaches tolerance too. If we have a right which we treasure, we'll gain a little respect for another's right to treasure his own. Freedom then is not duty's opposite: rather its reciprocal. Our duty is to your freedoms, that we might enjoy our own. Liberty helps us evolve as well. When the hundred flowers cannot contend in the garden, the struggle for existence no longer has selection to show which weeds are worthy.
35.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.4: stripping the bed for its flesh, ominous)
Advancing like a squirrelly rodent Persistence is dangerous
35.4x The squirrelly rodent's persistence (is) dangerous: The position is not appropriate At night, in the dumps, he is king, but this time he goes too far. He is found out by the dawn and the daylight, in flagrante delicto, sneaking around on the palace lawn, disclosed and exposed to the public, barely a squeak ahead of the royal gardener's shovel. He'll be lucky to keep his ratty old tail. The rodents, of course, have their places, and specific kinds of wits evolved to go with it. But clever, stealthy, nosey, skulking and sly sorts of wits have no advantage, or less, in this bright light of day. And all that you'll need to trap them is to understand what they crave. Self-interest is not their problem, only the unenlightened self-interest. He is stealing the things that he has today for the asking, just like a thief at a potlatch. Openness, light and fresh air restore the general welfare today. Good health is the parasite's downfall.
266

35.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 12: Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.5: easing separation, promise: this passes, that passes)
Regrets pass Loss and gain are not to be taken to heart Simply to go is promising Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
35.5x Loss (and) gain (are) not to be taken to heart: (Simply) to go will be rewarding Ebbs and flows, losses and gains, night's re-radiation of heat and day's solar gain: all of these are just properties of their systems. The system is the thing that remains. This means that one best adapts to the mean and the average conditions, not the most glorious ones. The entity which conditions itself to thrive on growth only is asking for death or extinction in any finite system. The one which lives inside its means will only require the average of losses and gains to get by. Then it is patient during the losing and grateful during the gaining. Look at one country which conquers another and then regards the plundered resources as income rather than capital. It can only fool itself for a time. Success and failure both teach. Living to learn might make its progress with either. Anything extra is blessing and anything less is a good appetite.
35.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
(Fan Yao 16.6: blind readiness, assume setbacks, avoid errors)
Advancing those antlers Limit the practice to discipline of the home town That harshness is timely Is not to be blamed But to persist is a disgrace
35.6x Limit (this) practice to subordinating the home town: (This) course (is) less than enlightened They are not yet exercising their freedoms in the way the herd's leader approves of. He has given them their encouragements, to let conscience choose and consequence teach. He expected this to result in some kind of natural order. But what he's so far denied them is the twenty full years that this will require to begin to show its value. Social climates like the general welfare or the public trust are as ecological systems. They take time to find the steadier states and integrate in their diversity. The show of horns comes too soon. He can save wear and tear on his great rack of antlers and act like someone worth looking up to, instead of a buck in a rut. To micromanage this thing is a setback, not progress. Benevolent rule becomes self-rule first. A discipline wants good disciples. A happy, self-possessed herd will make a lot more progress.
267

35, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 05, Xu, Anticipation qian gua (inverse): 36, Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured jiao gua (reverse): 36, Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured hu gua (nuclear): 39, Jian, Impasse shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
35, Notes * 35.X The invisible hand image comes from Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations. It isn't gratuitously that I bring in free market economics here. This is one of the main themes of this Gua. Beware of having a typical reaction here, though, and confusing free market economics with modern corporate capitalism. There's a big difference. * 35.0 Kang, the youngest of Wen Wang's three sons, (c. 1027 BCE), the elder two being Wu Wang and Zhou Gong. Here he seems to have set examples in free market (or laissez faire) economics, and granted certain broad liberties to his people "with hope for superior conduct." * 35.1 Three li is about a mile.
35, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Binah in Atziluth * Tarot: Three of Wands * Astrology: Neptune in Fire
35, Quotations * Go and wake up your luck. --Persian proverb * The flow of energy through a system acts to organize that system. --Harold Morowitz, Energy Flow in Biology * That government is best which governs least. --Thomas Paine (Quoted by Thoreau) * He who maketh no secret of himself shocketh: so much reason have ye to fear nakedness! Aye, if ye were gods, ye could then be ashamed of clothing! Oh! your poverty ye men, and your sordidness of soul! As much as ye give to your friend, will I give even to my foe, and will not have become poorer thereby. --Nietzsche, TSZ #14 * The greatest obstacle to progress is not man's inherited pugnacity, but his incorrigible tendency to parasitism. --William Ralph Inge * If you want to be free, there is but one way; it is to guarantee an equally full measure of liberty to all your neighbors. There is no other. --Carl Schurz * To know ourselves as this free, creative energy is to know the meaning of life in this world. --Bruno Barnhart
268

GUA 36, MING2 YI2, BRIGHTNESS OBSCURED
Binary 101 000 = 40; Li below, Kun above
36.X, Overall Image The light goes within to the heart of the earth Brightness Obscured The noble young one, accordingly, manages the multitude
using darkness, but with intelligence
The sun disappears for the night, going elsewhere to shine and giving relief from the heat. The stove is closed up tightly and the glowing coals are banked with earth to maintain the flame through the night. All of those beings who live in the shadows can come out to play. Through civilization's dark times and ages, wisdom, culture and hope itself might go underground. Intelligence learns of reasons it has to hide, to hold the light in trust for better days to come. Wise ones might be well-hidden, showing few outward signs, guarded in expression, even restrained in acts of good conscience and unadmired by choice. In such hands even ignorance serves the light.
36.0, Brightness Obscured Warranting difficult persistence
Dust settles on cultures and civilizations when the golden ages have run their course. Life has managed to tough it out through extremely severe and dark times, and even some mass extinctions, lasting millions of years. So what are a couple of centuries of stupidity and tyrants? The sage may stand in line with the masses, dressed up so the dark one sees nothing, wearing what looks like a noose or a leash, as tractable on the surface as one of the castrated herd. When packaged wisdom is bought and sold he just jingles his coins and lets fall some drool, too bright for the dimwits to see. The tyrant will have no use for this sage's wisdom. He will not be shown that most precious of all things to point to: an enemy with a clear agenda. Attracting attention, except by misdirection, attracts much of doubtful value. The mother bird may feign a wound, to distract predators from her young, but her first choice is staying hidden. Resistance is avoided: this becomes heat and then light. We do not need to carry the flame if we carry the know-how to get the flame started. We will not need to carry whole cultures, but it's good to cache the brightest parts. Dark's greatest foe is time.
269

36.M, Key Words Light, clarity, wisdom, intelligence + hidden, prevented, concealed, suppressed Discreet, cloaked, dampened, camouflaged, disguised, censored; go underground Banking, long-term investment, placing assets in durable forms, burying treasure Turning down the flame, banking the coals; withdrawing one's consent & support Covert intelligence, stealth operations, cloak & dagger scenarios, shadow warriors Self-suppression, repression, making ordinary, dumbing down shrewdly, veiling
36.G, From the Glossary ming2 (a, the) brightness, clarity, enlightenment, illumination, light, lucidity, luster; discernment, intelligence (of), perception, perceptiveness, resolution, vision, eyesight; agreement, covenant; (to be) aware, bright, brilliant, clear, clear-sighted, conscious, enlightened, evident, explicit, illustrious, informed, intelligent, intelligible, lucid, manifest, perceptive, pure, sagacious, shining, visionary; plain (as day and night); (to) assert, awaken, see, brighten, clarify, elucidate, enlighten, envision, explain, get clear, illuminate, shine, illustrate, make evident, perceive, show, understand, see (s, ed, ing) yi2 (to be) hidden, obscure(d), covered, covert, kept out of sight, suppressed, repressed, common, usual, invisible, level, even, just, equal, smooth, plain, simple, ordinary, vulgar, foreign, barbaric, distant, injured, hurt, wounded, dark; (to) hide, obscure, cover, make ordinary, suppress, disappear, fade into context, repress, injure, kill, wound, hurt, extinguish (s, ed, ing); (to feel) at rest, at ease, tranquil, safe, secure, sated, satisfied, full; (a, the) hiddenness, obscurity, cover, dark, cloak, shroud; need to know, camouflage; without color
36.T, Tuan Zhuan The light goes within (to) the heart of the earth
Brightness (is) obscured Inwardly coherent (and) bright while outwardly flexible (and) compliant
Using the obscurity (of) great trials The Sovereign Wen applied this Warranting difficult persistence: Darkening his own light Inwardly struggling, yet able to stay true to his purpose Prince Ji applied this
270

36.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity
(Fan Yao 15.1: authentic modesty, useful crossing great rivers)
Brightness obscured during flight* Dragging one's wing The noble young one in traveling Goes three days without a meal When there is somewhere to go Those in power would gossip
36.1x The noble young one in traveling: (Has) reasons not to eat In times like these great birds are shot down for sport. Mediocrity is the lord here. The time has not come for rising above, so he droops his wing and waddles away, being unclear and unthreatening, making his tracks not worth covering. Were he to let himself eat here, he might betray the predator's hunger and thirst. Since gossips will talk anyway, if he says anything now he might plant some well chosen rumors to send them off in a different direction. But he also has a right to stay silent if any thing said can be used against him. While he has somewhere to go, he watches his wake through the masses, adjusting his lights accordingly, to leave no impression or sign. After three days of bad posture, limp handshakes and vacant eyes, he'll be so happy to be where he's going, far from main streams, in from the cold, and visible.
36.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.2: embrace the wild, cross without boat, balance)
Brightness obscured And wounded in the left leg But relying on assistance The horse is strong enough Promising
36.2x Six second's promise: Compliantly using the givens He is caught in a trap set for those with less power and light, and wounded in the left thigh. This is more an annoyance than fatal, and note that he's suffered no wound to his head. He can even use the event to help turn the thing around. He now possesses a limp to assist his disguise, pain to help with his purpose and a slightly used trap as well. Unlike with your arms, you can't always think of your left leg as the spare. And this gets him thinking about some sort of prosthesis, like that horse over there in the shadows, who needs something useful to do. Suddenly he finds himself with twice the speed and five times the strength as before, and committed now to a new Plan B with ten times the promise of A. This is a function of balance and using all that circumstance offers. The center of the middle path is closest to all the options.
271

36.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.3: repeated returns, difficulty, but no blame)
Brightness obscured on the southern winter hunt Capturing the others' great leader This is not a call for a hasty resolution
36.3x The southern winter hunt has a purpose After this (is fulfilled), a great gain He takes his troops south in the winter to hunt. This is a practice with multiple uses, for training and exercise, not merely for food. But returning at night to those snares he has set, he finds the chief of his foes in the trap, hung upside down and thrashing most furiously, trying to cast some pretty black spells. Such was the good of being so stealthy. But this was no omen from heaven: only a stroke of great luck and not divine justice. Wisdom will not leap from here to exuberance: it might yet restore the darkness and mystery, instead of announcing the news. Great feuds are built up on multiple causes. The dark one still has some pretty mean allies, who might not take this news very well. Best to keep them confused and in darkness, control the light, and then pick them off one at a time. He can still use all that resolve he was saving.
36.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.4: abundant screens, finding their hidden leader)
Entering through the left side of the gut Capturing intelligence of the dark one's heart Before exiting through the courtyard gate
36.4x Entering through the left side of the gut: To capture the heart's intentions Learning a password or two, he sneaks into the dark one's encampment, nearing the tent where decisions are made. He sees the tyrant in action, learning of his motives and secret designs. Exploring this dark body politic, deep in the belly of the beast, he studies the heart of the matter, watching the damned thing pumping cold blood, looking for ways to stop it from beating. This is half of the mission, but information will do him no good if he fails to carry this out. However good his intelligence is, if it doesn't survive it is just as useless as ignorance. Between cloaks and daggers, cloaks are the greater weapons. In the same way that silence can win a debate, or an open hand do more damage than fists, the fleet, silent feet are the best weapon now. The walls protect him, their hiddenness hides him. He can walk right out the gate.
272

36.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.5: big cattle or modest sacrifice, genuine gains)
Prince Ji held his brightness obscured* Persistence was rewarded
36.5x Prince Ji's persistence: A light not accepting extinction The minister watches as his sovereign transforms, from a weak man into a monster. Related by blood to the tyrant, a slave in his own noble house, Jizi might have had no other choice but to feign an incurable madness, assuming that to end his own life was no option, wanting to keep what he believed in alive. One suspects this might be the way of most madness, whether it has or is method: its aim is to keep a life going, to keep the embers alive. Mind has become the lower priority. If sanity means being responsible, able to be held accountable, and the conscience finds only blind alleys and impasse, or a certain death in resistance, then let the illusions begin. To remain unnoticed means showing no light at all. Misery's night may be centuries long, but light is centuries longer. A well man can drool, then stop. The madman cannot stop.
36.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.6: plain white elegance, no mistake)
Instead of light, darkness At first rising into the sky But at last going into the earth
36.6x At first rising into the sky: To illuminate the four domains * At last going into the earth: Disregarding due order He might have illumined all four quarters from the great heights life allowed him. Yet he would neither see light nor be light, so all that he gained was a great height to fall from. Since the earth will swallow us all, creepers and fliers alike, it is nothing more than a choice in the long run: of how extremely to spend a life, or to spend it in wisdom or waste it. While the tyrant lived, he helped to dim the future of darkness, so maybe some tyrants to come will not be allowed such long life. Why are humans so damnably slow to learn these lessons they live for? This world still invites evil to flourish. The tyrant might even be buried right next to the sage. How is this fair? His grave even flowers more beautifully, from all of the spit and the feces, while the sage's is barren, salted by generations of tears. Fair is that we are still able to learn.
273

36, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 06, Song, Contention qian gua (inverse): 35, Jin, Expansion jiao gua (reverse): 35, Jin, Expansion hu gua (nuclear): 40, Jie, Release shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
36, Notes * 36.1-6 There are said to be several possible historical references here in the line texts: 1) Bo Yi, 2) Wen Wang, 3) Wu Wang, 4) Wei Zi, 5) Ji Zi, 6) Zhou Xin. * 36.5 Jizi (c. 1038 BCE) was an aristocrat, perhaps an uncle of the tyrant Zhou Xin, who tattooed his body and feigned madness to avoid participating in his dark era and avoid persecution for criticizing the tyrant's policies. When the dark reign was over his sanity reappeared. But he is said to have declined to serve the Zhou court as well. A good Western parallel may be found in William Shakespeare's Hamlet, who also did some damage in the darkness.
36, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Tipareth in Assiah * Tarot: Six of Pentacles (Investment) * Astrology: Sol in Earth
36, Quotations * Advise if this be worth attempting, or to sit in darkness here, hatching vain empires. --Milton, Paradise Lost * The greatest vested interest is not property but ignorance. --Jacob Jovanovich * Live unknown. --Epicurus * For this is hardest of all: to close the open hand out of love, and keep modest as a giver. --Nietzsche, TSZ #23 * You would play upon me, you would seem to know my stops, you would pluck out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my compass .... Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me, you cannot play upon me. --Shakespeare, Hamlet * Though this be madness, yet there is method in't. --ibid. * Dark ain't so bad if you know what's in it. --Sid Fleishman * Nowadays to be intelligible is to be found out. --Oscar Wilde
274

GUA 37, JIA1 REN2, FAMILY MEMBERS
Binary 101 011 = 43; Li below, Xun above
37.X, Overall Image Wind comes forth from flame Family members The noble young one, accordingly, speaks with substance
And acts with consistency
The fire glows on the hearth. With a roof to keep the warmth in and children to take it outside, it is always unseasonably warm here, the ideal and model climate inside with radiant heat for a sun. The well-tended fire at home has its effects on the world. Illumination and warmth mature, and then enter our larger families, from the nuclear to the extended, carrying the influence outward and welcoming new lessons home. Our words and deeds will not end here, so we'll speak from the heart to the point, to this smallest and safest circle of friends, in this scale model society and the first of our social experiments. By conveyance and convection, the society starts here.
37.0, Family Members Rewarding the woman's persistence
Reward the woman's commitment in order to merit her loyalty. First agreements, divisions of labor and turf, personal boundaries and goals and avowals of warmth and intimacy, will face their first tests here at home. Failing here, they will not likely work anywhere else. Each member first needs a place to begin. The various roles are each great domains, unless they become the cause in small battles. Until these commitments are equalled and risen upon, the home is a limit, not a base for one's operations. But the point of these points of beginning lies in their being outgrown. Thus their first function puts aside fear and replaces it with security. Security then becomes courage and courage turns into ability. This is the way that we know if a family works: it has functional members of varying sizes. At least more often than not: why some members cannot be redeemed has never been explained. Home is the place where we first expect fairness and where we will first learn to trust. This can be a poor preparation for life in the world outside, but at least we might have a few years to pre-cover, in advance of those beatings that life in this world has to offer.
275

37.M, Key Words Home, household, clan, familiar, kindred + people, others, individuals, humanity A microclimate, hearth, warmth, security, intimacy; roles in working relationships Microcosm, moral boundaries and practice, division of labor, social organization Relations, convection, influences on the larger world; contributions, propagation Commitments, ties, partnerships and contracts; meeting basic social requirements Domestic, dominion, domain, domine; householder in Hindu & Buddhist doctrine
37.G, From the Glossary jia1 (a, the) family, house, household, home, dwelling, domestic affair, relative, clan, class, profession (s); (ruling) families; familiar, kindred; school of thought, specialist; (to be) familial, familiar, at home, domestic, indoors; (to) live with, together; keep a household; (s, ed, ing); (a, the) family's, household's ren2 (a, the) person, people, man, woman, one(s), other(s), another, human being, individual (s); each (one), other persons/people; anybody, anyone, everybody, everyone, somebody, someone (else)('s); some, those; humanity, humankind, mankind, society; character, citizen, fellow, folk; inhabitant, member, occupant, participant, persona, personality, population, personnel, staff, role; (in) adulthood; (of) maturity; (to be) human, adult, grown, mature; humanity's; (a, the) person's, people's, occupant's; fellow-; -body, -man, -person, -ist
37.T, Tuan Zhuan Family members
The woman's true dignity lies within The man's true dignity lies without The masculine (and) feminine principles (Are) heaven's (and) earth's greater meanings Family members have dignities (and) nobilities herein Father (and) mother have their titles (When) father (is) father (and) child (is) child (When) elder brother (is) elder (and) younger (is) younger (When) husband (is) husband (and) wife (is) wife Then the family's course (is) upheld Uphold the family and all under heaven arranges itself
276

37.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.1: geese to shore, fledgling struggling, criticized)
Boundaries maintain the family* Regrets pass
37.1x Boundaries maintain the family: The purposes have yet to evolve At the beginning the home is in order, as the hearth is contained and the flame has its place to not go beyond. The signals are shared and made clear. Few questions remain about who makes what rules. This might seem to ignore several sources of warmth, to lack in affection, or to curb spontaneous feeling. There are mistakes and regrets. But this gives each household member a firm patch of ground to stand on and much can be done on a patch of firm ground. Even an unlimited branch must pick a direction to grow in. Rules are only a place to begin. The warmest of flames still comes from cold and insensitive logs. Unless this order becomes an obsession the home won't be a prison. Half of a family's troubles may come from boundary disputes, trespasses across unknown borders and the missing safe place for retreat.
37.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.2: drawn to returning, promising)
Having no other goals to pursue Remaining within, preparing meals Persistence is promising
37.2x Six second has promise: Accepting for the purpose of influence We'll assume we speak of the wife, but only to make the manly girls angry. Yes, the little woman is tending to her chores. Ordinary life, well and fully attended, might be one of the highlights of our existence, but this is not the point here. First things come first, like good health and nourishment. Once the basic needs are met, we are free to move on; until then we go in circles. She has chosen her chores. Her mate has his aching back too. But there are more choices to make, like not wasting time complaining of having no time, or not working twice as hard just to prove this point. To simplify tasks is to cut the day's work in half and set some time free. Husband wrestles the world with two strong arms and a will. But the wife in her place has a family of arms and wills. Serving is not servitude and the center is not confinement.
277

37.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.3: increased by unfortunate events, be true)
Family members scolded severely Regrettable harshness Yet opportune But wife and child smirking and mocking Ends in disgrace
37.3x Family members scolded severely: Not yet failure * Wife (and) child smirking (and) mocking: (Is) to lose the family's boundaries Someone forgot to take out the subconscious garbage. Even superior families will have such inferior moments. Tempers flare up in all but the quietest homes. These unfortunate little explosions at least open up hidden issues. Fires will get too hot. The smallest friction, the least petty thing within reach is summoned and marched into battle. Claims and accusations are stoked with extra heat. The middle ground gives way to always and never. Once this data is out in the open, it might be used to correct things. Sternest severity might even be called for, aimed at the problem, not in each other's faces. This will not end in catharsis: the need for this is a myth. Wounds heal. But when husband reacts to snickers and smirks by punching holes in the doors, this is a different level of troubles: loss of respect is the fire gone out.
37.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.4: mounting battlements, not capable of attack)
Enriching the family Full of promise
37.4x Enriching the family (is) full of promise: Acceptance in (this) position When the family prospers it begins to have its effects on the world. But standards of living must reach certain key levels first. Affluence first will fulfill basic needs. Generosity begins with getting enough to give. A well-fed and satisfied people can work longer hours for others. Individuals faring well make up the family welfare. Families faring well make up the general welfare. This does not begin with a king and flow downwards. All that a leader needs do here is to stand well out of the way and declare the right of a family to earn, not be given, a living. This will set some better examples. Dominion means being completely at home, and this is where it is learned. When wherewithal has been well-received or well-taken, it will find its way back around. A king should not even tax this: he should tax unwanted things.
278

37.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.5: dressed up in hills and gardens, shabby gift)
When the sovereign draws near to his family Do not be concerned about luck
37.5x The sovereign draws near to his family: Sharing mutual affection The king and his royal family are closely observed by all of their broader relations. Of course the gossips are busy, sniffing around for signs to mistrust, trying to pry and peer through the royal pomp. No, they do not have lives of their own, but yes, in a sense they should do this. Just as the king should put on his royal appearance. But the critic should also look for love and warmth, and the king should show off some of his nobler substance. The paternal and maternal forces at home will reflect in the patterns in matters of state. The cold winds of tyranny often begin on a cold hearth at home, where restrictions stand in for boundaries, or rules and laws for clear explanations and authority for the force of a healthy character. Society finds its first inspirations here and models itself accordingly. In a microcosm it's easily studied.
37.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.6: soaking one's head, serious)
Being true is as good as impressive The outcome is just as promising
37.6x Rather than being impressive, keep the promise Coming back to one's own individual style Father is first to admit it: he has as much growing to do as the wife and the kids. His place is something he earns. Authority authors its own life first. Life is an old enough process to know how to govern itself. A good work commands with more depth than coercion and the only compulsion that works well is that of compelling example. Motivation which only negates learns little about our reasons for moving. Superior authority works on the substance beneath it and relies not so much on its orders of who can peck whom. More evolved systems exist than those developed by chickens, but they also require more courage. True authority learns to respect before it asks for respect in turn, so that candor and frankness are signs of respect. Being familiar is a good thing, not unimpressive. Unimpressive is not being true.
279

37, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 40, Jie, Release qian gua (inverse): 38, Kui, Estrangement jiao gua (reverse): 50, Ding, The Cauldron hu gua (nuclear): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 47, 06, 58, 10 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
37, Notes * 37.1 There was a boundary to us then, when we was on the land. --John Steinbeck, The Grapes of Wrath
37, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Lamed; Path between Netzach and Tipareth (Trad: Tp-Gb) * Tarot: Justice (Living together) * Astrology: Seventh House, Cardinal Air, Libra
37, Quotations * Give and give until you wave goodbye. --Niakan maxim * One hour's teaching is better than a whole night of prayer. --Mohammed * A teacher affects eternity; he can never tell where his influence stops. --Henry Adams * Man's sense of himself as separate from and opposed to the universe is a bar to his conducting its currents. It insulates him. --A. Crowley, Magick * The hand that rocks the cradle is the hand that rules the world. --William Ross Wallace * Home is heaven for beginners. --Charles H. Parkhurst * Place the work of a wife and mother on the same footing as other work; that is, on the footing of labor worth its hire. --G. B. Shaw * The greatest thing a father can do for his children is to love their mother. --Josh McDowell * If you educate a man you educate a person, but if you educate a woman you educate a family. --Ruby Manikan
280

GUA 38, KUI2, ESTRANGEMENT
Binary 110 101 = 53; Dui below, Li above
38.X, Overall Image The flame rises, the lake descends Estrangement The noble young one, accordingly, associates, and yet is unique
Fire and water move in different directions. The mystic must stretch to name them one thing. Unity needs reflection. Things like to move and grow according to their natures. More often than not, this will mean moving and growing apart. Existence means to stand out. Evolution's direction is out and away; if it had a goal it would not be to make things the same. Even within a species, the normal growth is apart. But if growth itself grows distances, then maturity learns to cross distances, not to erase them. The sage likes comparing, seeing the similar and families. But he also sees limits to this, so within his closest of fellowships he retains his singular nature.
38.0, Estrangement In ordinary matters, promising
When things do not seem to be coming together, it is only our cosmos expanding. We focus then on small, nearby things that are coming apart somewhat less quickly. If we begin with the small and the ordinary, such as working on who we are, we can keep our goals attainable. The others will go where they must and do what they will. The distance between our points of view must increase, but this is how we come to know depth. Diversification is life, while forces working to make all things conform weaken the health of the system. Even the novice on mystical paths has a sense that all things are at one and connected. But many get the idea that this means all things are the same, that they dissolve in some general soup, and that no self ever existed. The simpletons say that religions all say the same thing. What good does that do? Selves do exist, they just aren't all that important or real. And yet to have one that works is one truly marvelous thing. Before your birth and after your death are vast, perfect times for perfecting your oneness with the oneness of being. Between is a short time to be and to dare, to articulate self and identity, and then go out exploring.
281

38.M, Key Words Divergence, dissociation, disparity, dissonance, dissention, discord, contradiction Polarization, parting of ways, ambivalence, tension, stress; odd, crafty, perverse Uniqueness, diversity, contrast, standing out, sticking out, separation, strangeness To stare, squint as if disbelieving, be astonished; individual nature, distinctiveness Separateness, aloneness, alienation, incongruity; to stand alone, agree to disagree Detachment, isolation, aloneness; emphasis, articulation, stress as in highlighting
38.G, From the Glossary kui2 (to be) estranged, separated, distant, weird, dissociated, divergent, foreign alien, separate(d), removed, polarized, contrary, unusual, strange, opposed, in opposition, diametrically opposed; (a, the) disparity, estrangement, separation, polarity; eyes not aligned, moving separately
38.T, Tuan Zhuan Estrangement
The fire moves, but (only) upwards The lake moves, but (only) downwards Two women dwell together (But) their intentions do not function as one Enjoyment, along with dependence on clarity The flexible advances, and so improves (its) conduct Gaining the center and resonating with the firm And so it is that ordinary matters (are) promising Heaven (and) earth diverge, but still their endeavors converge Masculine (and) feminine diverge, but their objectives interact The myriad beings diverge, but their affairs (are) interrelated Estrangement's timely application (is) very important here!
282

38.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.1: soaking one's tail, embarrassing)
Regrets pass The missing horse Should not be pursued: it returns on its own Upon seeing the worst in others Simply avoid mistakes
38.1x Seeing the worst (in) others: In order to avoid mistakes The horse gets edgy and bolts, but the farmer will keep to his task. When night falls the horse returns on his own and gets fed. To feed the horse is to meet him halfway. He can keep his unbroken spirit this way and gets to know the neighborhood better. To best prepare to live your own life, first prepare to let the others live theirs. Beings, given sufficient patience and time, will find an appropriate order, and still keep that spark which makes each unique. Even the wrongness in beings will serve us when this is allowed to stand out. Evil is a part of this world of men, just as a treacherous footing is a part of the world of earth. One does not go far fearing this, nor does one level the earth, though many may try. We may seek instead to know where we stand, and if this is not any good then we move. Respect for what is might even save lives.
38.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao 21.2: biting tender meat, burying nose, no harm done)
Meeting with the leader in the alley Not wrong
38.2x Meeting with the leader in the alley: Still not off the path He meets with his leader in secret, to formulate plans for success in small matters. The permit was too hard to get. In times of strife and estrangement, trust is renamed conspiracy. When the law says that three make a riot, then two make an excellent quorum. If the people could vote on this plan, the critics would tear it apart. They hear as they will, each to his delusion, so a court is convened with all critics absent, in the shadows of this quiet alley. They cut across the protocols; they cut through all of the crap. No, these two are not following rules. If they did they would add to the pressures to make things the same and unchanging, which is nothing less than the cause behind all of this tension. Breaking free to be just yourself is the way past this problem. Minds will find ways to meet, and these smaller movements add up.
283

38.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.3: prince offers to son of heaven, commoner cannot)
Seeing a wagon held up Its oxen restrained Its occupant's head shaved and nose cut off Regardless of beginning, there will be an end
38.3x Seeing the wagon held up: The place (was) not appropriate * Regardless of beginning, there will be an end: Finding firmness He loads his fancy wagon with goods and takes the scenic back roads. But a gang from some sub-species of man descends on him from above. The bandits' dreams come true. They drag his wagon into the bushes and do unspeakable things to his oxen. Sated with this they spoil his clothes, shave his head and then cut off his nose. And vanish with the plunder and spoils. In return for the chance to have all this fun, for cheering them up and making their day, they let him escape with his life. Such a low beginning to have such a half-decent end! It almost seems like charity now. Life must be all that he needed. Of course this act is of evil, even if these bandits did have issues with mothers and fathers. No relative ethic will make it make sense. This is a study in contrast and irreconcilable difference. When intolerable it will be changed.
38.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.4: decreasing sufferings, take charge, expedite)
Estranged and alone Meeting someone unique Exchanging confidences The distress Is no longer wrong
38.4x Exchanging confidences, nothing (is) wrong: The aims (are) carried out He belongs to the smallest group possible, as alone as he might ever be. Repelled to the edge of this strange situation, he works his way further outward. As some of the dust and smoke clears away he notes that another is fleeing as well. Here now are your two or more gathered, two lonely souls haunting the margin, on a newly found common ground. Call this alliance, coalition, support group or church, one equally lonely friend can turn the whole thing around. The periphery of madness becomes the vanguard of sanity, a perilous position becomes an exciting frontier, the two odd ones out can get even. Results such as this can redeem the original problem. Unity in diversity is the making of common cause on the higher levels of being. Cohesion and convergence might not be the general rule, but we'll take it when we can get it.
284

38.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua* 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao* 10.5: decisive steps, persistence is stressful)
Regrets pass Their kind* eats tender flesh In continuing on, where is the harm?
38.5x Their kind eats tender flesh: Moving on will have (its) rewards The tiger is surely enough unlike you to accomplish some of the things you cannot. And you don't need more sets of skills that are just like your own. This one would make a great ally, or an enemy for your enemy. But unless you are able to find or make common cause, you might want to give him wide margins, to allow for your errors, such as looking so much like his food. He has not been a kindred spirit for many millions of years, although he did help your ancestors when they needed to learn to run faster. Divergence is not a diversion to mess with. You might even try to relate from somewhere way over there, closer to the familiar, and to beings who speak in more similar tongues. And yet your basic idea is good: diversity is most useful, not a problem to solve. And only from self can other be loved or respected.
38.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.6: empty basket, bloodless sacrifice, meritless)
Estranged and alone Watching a hog, covered with muck Once a wagon transporting demons At first stringing that bow But later unstringing the bow It is not an adversary but a marital suitor In going, greet the rain After this, all is well
38.6x Greeting the rain holds promise: A multitude (of) doubts disappear In such a perfect sympathy with this spirit of alienation, he watches this poorly-lit road on a dark and drizzling day. But as clouds grow darker they also get closer to getting rid of their rain. Things grow exceedingly spooky and the visions grow more bizarre. The tension builds to a palpable state, not just in the string of his longbow. The known and the familiar will set the mind at ease, while the unknown and strange wake us up. Oddness, newness and stress rouse us into creative perceptions, so that we might imagine the worst and so avoid it. The weirdness on parade here is like the darkness of the clouds: when the mood grows too thick it will dump. Drizzling rain becomes genial, cleansing rain; even the mud is delightful. This ought to be a relief. To see devils in a fiancé this soon is too much: this is supposed to stay a surprise.
285

38, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 39, Jian, Impasse qian gua (inverse): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members jiao gua (reverse): 49, Ge, Seasonal Change hu gua (nuclear): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 48, 57, 05. 09 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
38, Notes * 38.5 This is a zhi Gua and fan yao reference to hu, the tiger in Gua 10. If ever a stranger's uniqueness and individuality commanded respect ....
38, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Netzach in Atziluth * Tarot: Seven of Wands * Astrology: Venus in Fire
38, Quotations * Thank Allah, for in his wisdom he put death at the end of life and not at its beginning. --Arabic proverb * Resist much, obey little. --Walt Whitman * ... who wield a poem huger than the grave from whom shall time no refuge keep though all weird worlds must be opened? --e.e. cummings * We are all in this alone. --Lily Tomlin * Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere. --Shakespeare, Henry IV * The more intelligent a man is, the more originality he discovers in men. Ordinary people see no difference between men. --Pascal * There is as much difference between us and ourselves as between us and others. --Montaigne * The health of an environmental system is directly proportionate to its diversity. --An Axiom in Ecology * It is only to the individual that a soul is given. --Albert Einstein
286

GUA 39, JIAN3, IMPASSE
Binary 001 010 = 10; Gen below, Kan above
39.X, Overall Image Over the mountain is water Impasse The noble young one, accordingly,
turns bodily around to work on character
Storms drench the highlands. The mountain pass is closed and all plans to cross it are a washout today. Predictability fails. This day's journey is over by noon. There is no problem to solve here, unless it's how best to give up going forward for now, or how and where best to weather this storm. Progress depends on retracing the last few steps. Dead ends will permit some rethinking, as the journey replaces the goal. The last thing you may want to hear now is that this will help you build character, but you have extra energy now and you do need to broaden your old frame of mind. There isn't a reason why this has happened to you, so make one up back at the inn.
39.0, Impasse Worthwhile west to south Not worthwhile east to north Rewarding to encounter a mature human being Persistence is opportune
If the way you go is not the wrong way, then at least it is at the wrong time. Ahead, things are cold and wet, dangerous, lonely and steep. You might still need to travel northeast, but first the detour will take you southwest, maybe straight back to those moderate midlands and the inn that you recently passed when still on the way to bad news. It might be that the sage is already there, with his outlook already improving and having a truly great time. This is only a drawback in one direction. It is going forward in others. You could now make some personal progress, unless of course there are storms there as well, like grumbling or whining emotional storms. Then you'd really be stuck here. Going into trouble is not forward progress, even if once you thought that direction was forth. Minds are just made to be changed, and most of the roads around here can be traveled both ways. Sometimes even humankind's next great steps forward will be in a backwards direction. And sometimes remaking ourselves to fit the places we come to beats remaking those places to suit what we think we want. Character work is more fruitful than changing the climate or weather.
287

39.M, Key Words Impediment, delay, detour, complication, inconvenience, drawback, immobility Hindrance, holdup, barrier, obstruction, obstacle, interruption, discouragement Discontent, stationary period; convoluted route, reorientation; options narrowing A closed mountain pass, waiting out the storm; lowering expectations and goals Redefine goals for achievability; detoured but not deterred; ability to compensate Knowing when to stop, consolidate progress to date, rethink directions and plans
39.G, From the Glossary jian3 (a, an, the) impasse, obstacle, impediment, drawback, setback, obstruction, difficulty, misfortune, fault, holdup, detour, limp, complication, handicap; (to) go lame, limp, walk lame, stumble (s, ed ing); (to be) halting, hobbled, proud, arrogant, impassable, obstructed, complicated, set back, held up, detained, deterred, interrupted; defective
39.T, Tuan Zhuan Impasse
(Means) problems Risk lies ahead To perceive the risk and be able to stop
(Is) wisdom indeed! Impasse (is) worthwhile west (to) south:
To make progress (is) to find the center It is not worthwhile east (to) north:
This way dead ends Rewarding to encounter a mature human being:
Making progress will be an achievement (In) a proper position, persistence (is) opportune:
In order to do right by the territory Impasse's timely application (is) very important now!
288

39.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.1: braking wheels, soaking tail, no harm done)
If going is impassable Then coming back is respectable
39.1x (If) going (is) impassable (then) coming back (is) respectable:
(It is) reasonable to wait Who calls it a shameful or embarrassing thing to change your mind and your plans? The smarter one of a pair takes note of the dark clouds over the pass and elects to sit by the bridge, cooling his tired feet and wiggling his toes in the water, attending the rhythm of things, consolidating his progress so far. His partner presses on into the foothills, but there finds himself surrounded on one huge side. This is not a gauntlet or challenge: if it's you in motion towards trouble, then where is blame to be placed? By evening he catches up with his partner, all the way back at the bridge, having now gone twice the distance for nothing, while his partner got so far ahead here simply by lagging behind. If this direction leads nowhere, then why not go nowhere as well, saving effort? Home is where the feet are: advance for its own sake won't get there.
39.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.2: well down low, damaged bucket, shoot fish)
The sovereign's minister is set back and interrupted But this is not one person's cause
39.2x The sovereign's minister (is) set back (and) interrupted: In the end there is no reproach Some of these crazy things that he does in his work for the king, had he decided to do them himself, would make him seem pretty foolish. When the mountain's pass is closed, the servant goes up into the storm and tries to open it up. When the bard tells the king of a magical stone on top of the land's highest peak, the servant gets orders for a mid-winter climb through the snow. The king may have no idea what he puts this poor fellow through. At least he gets to use the king's gear. This isn't a question of judgment at all, although serving a greater cause should nevertheless still spare you for some future use, else the greater good was just bad and a waste. With little credit for the successes and little blame for failures, he takes what he can from the work. The king owns the mountain in theory, the servant owns it in fact.
289

39.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
(Fan Yao 08.3: joining with such inferior people)
If going is impassable Then coming back means turning around
39.3x (If) going (is) impassable (then) coming back (means) turning around:
(Those) within rejoice in this Up close to the ridge he finds problems, a difficult pass and clouds getting darker. It looks like a good adventure and he has both health and courage. But this is why he was chosen to scout. Those who follow are not bold types, but they do have their various merits. And so he retreats with his latest perspectives, looking less foolish by walking back forwards, having traveled this distance twice without any progress or blame. This was not some cosmic purpose. To act differently on new information is not vacillation. You just turn around and go in the new kind of forward, make the two left turns, and whatever was holding you back now helps you forward. Retreat saves more than himself. He subordinates an objective to gain a successful outcome. How linear it is to be stuck in just one direction: that's a flunked intelligence test.
39.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.4: unsettled, ambivalent, going, coming, for allies)
If going is impassable Then coming back means alliance
39.4x (If) going (is) impassable (then) coming back (means) alliance:
The appropriate position (is in) reality The frustrated traveler has fallen back to regroup in the tavern, to join with the others in similar straits. And soon there is talk about forming a new expedition. When one cannot make it alone, when every step forward means being taken two steps aback, the only personal failure might be one of breadth, and not strength. And so the new support group puts its partly experienced minds all together to assemble the better plan. In aggregate they will have no more strength than before. But in specializing they make better use of each other, with new connections and contacts, new ropes and strings to pull. A guide will do what a brute cannot, a cook can spare them all some bad meals and a medic can care for the wounded. One can hope too that there is a genius among them, to say it is better to wait until after this storm has passed.
290

39.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity
(Fan Yao 15.5: worthless neighbors, occupy and subjugate)
At a major impasse Companions appear
39.5x (At a) major impasse, companions appear: Because the center (is) defined In the midst of the greatest obstructions, when the large and real problems cannot be avoided, some of your most average people do some impressive things: they rise up to equal their challenges and some will even help some perfect stranger in trouble. Now here is one amazing coincidence: every single ancestor of every one of these heroes survived their trials of life, and even their teenage years, at least long enough to have offspring. As soon as survival is threatened the body will awaken old skills. Then comes the warrior into the fray, taking this threat by the throat. Friends and onlookers follow, wielding shovels and stones. What emerges in our emergencies are humans at their best. Even misanthropes are impressed as people pull together. But do these defining moments define who we are, or merely who our friends are?
39.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.6: wild goose feathers, may use in sacred dance)
If going is impassable Then coming back means maturity Promising Rewarding to encounter a mature human being
39.6x (If) going (is) impassable (then) coming back (means) maturity:
The purpose lies within * Rewarding to encounter a mature human being: Thereby to attend to the worthy He has already gone through the worst of the trouble. He commits himself now to his years of reflection and wanders the forested mountains in peace, while thinking the walls of the city to be a part of his past. But far beyond the gates, he discovers impending trouble, coming for those he left far behind. Girding his loins with his anchorite's robe, he shows some impressive speed for such an old, gentle fellow. It is perfectly understandable that some will choose to just go, while some will opt to keep their compassionate vigils until the very last blade of grass is enlightened. Some scout in the larger sense: they still must go beyond, to know what is open or closed and to see where we're going together. For such a service, freedom like this ought to go unquestioned. How the society treats them says much about its future.
291

39, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 38, Kui, Estrangement qian gua (inverse): 40, Jie, Release jiao gua (reverse): 04, Meng, Inexperience hu gua (nuclear): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 16, 35, 51, 21 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
39, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Chesed in Briah * Tarot: Four of Cups * Astrology: Jupiter in Water
39, Quotations * There's a divinity that shapes our ends, rough hew them how we will. --Shakespeare, Hamlet * I can think, I can wait, I can fast. --Herman Hesse, Siddhartha * Sweet are the uses of adversity. --Shakespeare, As You Like It * A loss rarely remains a loss for an hour. --Nietzsche, Joyful Wisdom (A good substitute for the inane `everything happens for a reason') * It is quite a three-pipe problem. --Arthur Conan Doyle * To know when to stop is the highest attainment. Those who cannot do so will be destroyed on the lathe of heaven. --Zhuangzi * ... grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, the courage to change the things I can, and the wisdom to know the difference. --Reinhold Niebuhr, "The Serenity Prayer" * An adventure is only an inconvenience rightly considered. --G. K. Chesterton
292

GUA 40, JIE3, RELEASE
Binary 010 100 = 20; Kan below, Zhen above
40.X, Overall Image Thunder and rain create Release The noble young one, accordingly, pardons transgressions
And is broad-minded regarding offenses
The tension builds up to its high point, but then it must let go. Thunder shakes the sky loose with laughter, clearing the air and returning the world to normal. The seed pods swell up and burst. The rainbow trailing the thunderhead sees all the stress and tension forgiven. One's self-destructive enemies, by definition, destroy themselves. Unsustainable behavior extinguishes itself. The danger itself will promote an escape. The causes of these go away. Things will get more tense and complex until all the right factors are present. Then, when timing is right, suddenly things come together. Judges pardon mistakes and misdeeds. Resentment is not a transcendent approach.
40.0, Release Worthwhile west to south Without a place to go One's coming return is promising If there is a place to go To be prompt is promising
The archer tenses his bow and takes aim, the readied arrow just flies. The sorcerer gathers excitement and locks this into his image of what is to be, but then his spell must cast itself. Holding on to this tension interferes with its release. The timing will be the final addition. Now is the time to let go. Resentment and blame are burdens on all those who hold them, so forgiveness is given for their sake and benefit, not for the one forgiven. We ought to just walk away from our sacrifice, and not keep possession of how great or worthy it was, or doubts about its greatness or worth. The spirits already know just what to do. If what remained to be done has already been done, to linger on things which cannot be altered, or to hunt down the results is untimely. All you can do is to put the factors together, combine or blend them in proper proportions and exercise a patient restraint until that magical moment when the world and you both want to go the same way. The archer who hangs on to his arrow misses the point completely. So does the artist who will not let go of his art, and parents who will not say yes to their children. You have done the best you can.
293

40.M, Key Words Delivery, deliverance, discharge, follow through, liberation, relief, emancipation Loosen, disentangle, extricate, forgive, pardon, allow, let go, free, release, slacken Explain, clarify, synthesize, reconcile, temper, transcend, alleviate, dissolve, undo Release arrows; casting (3rd step of a spell: tense, aim, release); be done, move on Begin anew; clean break with past, absolve; culmination, sublimation; untie knots Both forgiveness and permission; options opening; redemption, not salvation (#59)
40.G, From the Glossary jie3 (to) release, relieve, discharge, let go (of), dispel, allay, alleviate, dismiss, loosen, untie, relax, undo, untangle, liberate, free, remove, temper, mitigate, deliver, separate, open up, break up, disperse, interpret, solve, dissolve, resolve, settle, explain, understand, comprehend, get rid of, be free of, divide; cut or pull open, apart (s, ed, ing); (a, the) solution(s), liberty, freedom, relief, deliverance, release, delivery, liberation, disaggregation, disintegration; The character refers to a knot horn, or a little piece of antler tip that people used to carry around on their belts to disentangle ropes and untie knots. Like the nautical tool called a fid.
40.T, Tuan Zhuan Release
Crisis leads to movement Movement then gets free of crisis Released Release favors the west to the south: To go (is) to gain the multitude One's coming return (is) promising: Here to find the center (In) having somewhere to go, to be prompt (is) promising: (In) making progress there will be achievement Heaven (and) earth let loose as thunder (and) rain get to work Thunder (and) rain go to work, and hundreds of seed pods
Of plants (and) trees, as one, begin to burst Release's opportune timing (is) very important now!
294

40.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.1: marrying as a second wife, lame can take steps)
No blame
40.1x Firmness (and) flexibility have a common boundary here (In) the meaning of no blame Error, when viewed from its most useful angle, is another kind of intelligence. It is a usable sort of knowledge, but not a thing that you want to have stuck in your heart or your mind, else resentment repeats the same sentiment over and over again. This gets in the way of release and forgiveness, gumming up the next round of changes. It is not that humans should not be held to account for their errors. But we do seek the best ways to outgrow them. Fixing blame is just fixing a thing against changes, to lock up the past, or else drag it with us. If something is done, it will not be done better. We want instead to own our imperfections, and then use our property rights to correct them. One on the middle path can use all situations; if off center, things on the far side are too far out of our reach. In balance we can make the best of the bad.
40.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
(Fan Yao 16.2: resolved in stone, an unending day)
On the hunt, taking three foxes Claiming the golden arrow Persistence is timely
40.2x Nine second's persistence (is) promising: Finding the middle path His training with bow and arrow was a way to center and focus his mind, to go to the heart of the matter. He trained his aim to be true. But this did not work only in theory. Out in the field, he has a day worth recording. He finds both the zone and the flow - the flights of the arrows are seen in the sighting. He brings the three foxes home with three shots and the lord awards him the arrow of bronze. Of course this arrow is about the worst thing to hunt with, and it's not that much better for targets. This thing is no more than a symbol, to commemorate this day. If he is not careful, it could come to symbolize the day he could never let go of. But an ace, three times over, should know this already. Then let him convert the honor to confidence, rather than pride, then the foxy, thieving, cunning sneaks will not regain their advantage.
295

40.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao 32.3: lacking continuous character, continuing thus)
Shouldering baggage while riding Inviting robbers to approach Persistence is embarrassing
40.3x Shouldering baggage while riding: And further, inviting derision * Of our own accord to encourage hostility Given this, who is to blame? An upstart in this new, richer world, he carries the same ragged, wanderer's pack on his back, while driving his fancy, new carriage. Newly well-to-do, he gives up none of his past, as if to show others how far he has come, so he will not drop his old baggage. His recent good fortune may not be ill-gotten, but he does risk it being ill-held. The bandits will gladly deliver him, release him from all these new burdens, if he will not let go of the old ones himself. Sometimes the things that we've been and done, and all of the people we used to be, will want to go with us through life, with all that we ever possessed in tow. This makes for a dismally slow procession. Yet we have traits running counter to this: even when moving to much larger homes, most of us know the relief that we feel in choosing which of our piles to let go of.
40.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.4: militia's fallback encampment, not a mistake)
Release your big toe* When companions approach, trust them
40.4x Release your big toe: Still not (in) the proper stance The young archer's aim might be superb, but something is wrong with his stance. He has fumbled his otherwise excellent shot by catching his toe in the bowstring. The positions assumed by the archers are not like those poses and postures carried through time by rituals. Every part of a stance has a meaning and translates into aim. These have been tested and trued for thousands of years, and while it might be true that refinements might lurk undiscovered, most of these alternate options have now been tried and let go of. The aim is the thing, and means should assist, not intrude. Here at least he can trust the social norms, and the friends who now rush to his aid. Three quivers of bull's eyes will command more respect than doing one's very own thing. All of the fancy maneuvers just cannot forget to stand on inelegant ground.
296

40.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.5: no nose or feet, rouge sashed help, slow relief)
The noble young one, in bondage, still has freedoms Promising Holding true among the common people
40.5x The noble young one (still) owns freedoms (Which) the common people retreat (from) Deliverance is a triumph, and this part is easy to bear. But whether it unchains the people, liberates the mind, opens the heart, saves the soul or frees the spirit, it will leave you facing enormous unknowns, not the thing for faint-hearted people. Others don't want the unknowns. If one would be free of the others, simply tell them that deliverance is self-devised, that salvation is a question of diligence. The others will flee in great haste to the safety of their entanglements. Freedom lies in the attitudes. Sleep under a tree in the mountains and you are camping, sleep under a tree in the park and you are homeless. The unfree are unfree wherever they go, especially on vacation. The free are always free, even in chains or in prison. How optional is their suffering? They simply volunteer to be where they are, then they depart from there.
40.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.6: being confident, drinking wine, don't soak head)
The duke takes aim at the raptor atop the high battlement's peak
Success at this means nothing cannot be turned to advantage
40.6x The duke takes aim at the raptor In order to be free of the obstinate The raptor alights up on the high wall, hardened to purpose and looking for plunder, flaunting the way that he holds those below in his spell. The duke strings his bow and awaits the right time. The highest point of the predator's arrogance makes one focal point the aim of all senses. The tension it created has transferred itself to the string. Timing and circumstance fire the shaft. There is no pardon or lenience here. Time itself has called for this liberation. It had to take care of itself, the result was much too compelling. Once the pieces were all in place it was only a matter of time, and a duke to be time's servant. Life is under the shadow no more. The raptor, once plucked, looks a lot like a chicken: a really nasty, inedible chicken. Of course this is not just a fowl, but the symbol at the center of focus, and the excuse to stay unfree.
297

40, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members qian gua (inverse): 39, Jian, Impasse jiao gua (reverse): 03, Zhun, Rallying hu gua (nuclear): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 15, 52, 36, 22 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
40, Notes * 40.4 Mu can mean toe or thumb. The release in Chinese archery is different than in the west: the string is held with the thumb, which in turn is secured by a finger. This is now known as the Mongolian Release, but it's more ancient than that. In the west, three fingers are used and no thumb. In this case, if Mu is thumb, one is not letting go of the string, or else a tense release is fouling the shot. But knowing the authors of the Zhouyi it could also be a play on the ambiguity of the term - your thumb might as well be a toe for all the finesse of your release.
40, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Samech; Path between Tipareth and Chesed (Trad: Ys-Tp) * Tarot: Temperance (Tempering, Timing, The spell's `casting') * Astrology: Ninth House, Mutable Fire, Sagittarius (note archery ref.'s)
40, Quotations * Peace, sisters, the charm's wound up. --Shakespeare, Macbeth * ... but let him come ... plunder whatever dregs that in the ceaseless strife of his staunch body have not found time as yet to turn from flesh and bone into pure spirit, lightning, deeds and joy. The archer has fooled you, Death, he's squandered all your goods. --Nikos Kazantzakis, The Odyssey * There can be no real freedom without the freedom to fail. --Eric Hoffer * Wild liberty breeds iron conscience; natures with great impulses have great resources and return from far. --Emerson * To change your idea of the world is the crux of sorcery. --Carlos Castaneda, Tales of Power * The jailor can't go home until the prisoner is free. --Tom Brady * The prisoner is free. --Kalahari bushman death song. * Timing has a lot to do with the outcome of a rain dance. --Unknown * The weak can never forgive. Forgiveness is the attribute of the strong. --Gandhi
298

GUA 41, SUN3, DECREASING
Binary 110 001 = 48; Dui below, Gen above
41.X, Overall Image At the foot of the mountain is a marsh Decreasing The noble young one, accordingly,
rules out resentments (and) restrains desires
The water level is low. A mountain towers above, its image held in the pool as a heart holds up a hope. The mountain seems twice as high, the pool seems twice as empty. Only half of an offering sits at the base of the shrine. The flower gives up its petals and attends to developing seeds. The young noble works on his character, giving up this and that, distilling life down to what matters the most. His thrift is extended even to feelings. He fixes the smallest of leaks to save liquid, the resources that he needs. If he must lose, he can start by losing the unwanted things, his defects and excesses, troubles and losses, resentments and cravings. This way poverty becomes simplicity.
41.0, Decreasing Be true Outstanding opportunity Nothing is wrong But it calls for persistence Worthwhile to have somewhere to go How is this applied? A pair of simple rice baskets may be used for the offering
To give a thing up is not always a loss if it goes to where it is needed and it comes from where it is not. Nor is surrender always defeat, nor thrift an ungenerous way. Young sprouts and seedlings are topped and pruned but are not diminished thereby. A sacrifice is supposed to cost less than its worth. Two small bowls, even if filled with what is on hand and not needed, might be sacred to someone else. Even if one is half full and the other half empty, there will be a full measure somewhere. And if good spirits top these both off, half-measures can be seen in new ways. Something wonderful happens when economy again means thrift. Whatever is left over, once the needless has gone, is enriched, treasured, appreciated and more easily cared for. After a long run of growth and prosperity this may be hard to relearn. We pare our domains and ambitions back down and lower our expectations, using phrases like leaner and meaner, less is more, or small is beautiful. But does wealth merely mean having much of what is scarce? Why not enough of what is plentiful and the same portion when it's not? It has to be worth something to not suffer the ups and downs.
299

41.M, Key Words Diminish; to reduce, economize, forego; contraction, concentration, conservation Sacrificing, offering up; dues, service, subtraction, trying to lose only inessentials Trimming excesses, plugging leaks, lowering expectations, doing more with less To make the most, make do; distill, condense, concentrate as forms of enrichment Enrich, make less dilute, keep the good stuff; building resilience; losing negatives Extenuation, distraction, depreciation, demands on resources, use, wear and tear
41.G, From the Glossary sun3 (to) belittle, chastise, cut (back), criticize, cut down to size, damage, harm, injure, decrease, destroy, diminish, dwindle, economize, lessen, lose, reduce, trim, spoil, subtract, weaken, wound (s, ed, ing); (a, the) concentration, contraction, decrease, detriment, diminution, loss, reduction; (to be) concentrated, contracted, decreased (by), diminished, lessened, reduced, taken from, weakened; detrimental, disadvantageous
41.T, Tuan Zhuan Decreasing
Decreasing the subordinate to increase the superior This process elevates conduct Decreasing and still holding true (Is) outstanding opportunity Nothing (is) wrong (But it) calls for persistence Worthwhile to have somewhere to go How is this applied? A pair of (simple) rice baskets may be used for the offering: Two (small) rice baskets will correspond with the time Decreasing the firm to increase the flexible presumes timeliness Decrease (and) increase (are) excess (and) want Interacting in time (and) functioning together
300

41.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience
(Fan Yao 04.1: discipline to remove fetters, not to continue)
One's own affairs are rushed and passed by No harm is done But consider decreasing this
41.1x One's own affairs (are) rushed (and) passed by: Value a joining of purposes The value of your services may be weighed in various ways. To suspend your own activities and rush off with your offerings to help a friend in need is, of course, an unselfish and generous thing to offer. But if your own activities had any true value in their own right, however lesser or greater than what you abandoned them for, this really ought to be weighed in the balance as well. Are you meeting the other's true needs? Might you be weakening your friend's self-reliance? Good water is bad for stopping up leaks. What is your effort and time really worth? Or does it not have this kind of value? If decreasing yourself is done with a real economy, then nothing much of value is lost. But think small. If you have but a small cache of seed for next season, it is just as foolish to feed it to needy friends as it is to consume it yourself.
41.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.2: subverted appetite, dismiss norms, hunger in hills)
Worthwhile to be steadfast To go boldly is ill-omened Avoiding decrease increases one
41.2x Nine second merits steadfastness: Concentrate in order to accomplish the goal The master of the temple scrubs and waxes the floors, prepares the monk's meals, cleans up the altar and keeps the idol smoking. But for all of this humble service, he doesn't give anything up. These are the steps on his path, this is exactly the life he has asked for, the price he has chosen to pay. The very nature of his position is a hard look at the nature of sacrifice. To be blunt, this is often no more than greed in its sanctified form, although the best will say thanks for what little they have, and not please for how much they want. A sage will be wary of this and true to himself. He cannot give up his spark to serve in his cause: he needs his center and all of his strength for the blessing, before making anything sacred. To be happy with getting your basic needs met will set you free to lose without losing and gain without risk.
301

41.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.3: fine horse, daily training, having a place to go)
Three people set out And in due order lose one member A single person sets out And in due order finds a companion
41.3x One person sets out: The third gives rise to uncertainties Decrease and increase might only be ways for us to look backwards, to describe the behavior of excess and lack, as derivatives, out of the larger dimensions of change. They are only ideas, confined to short spans of time, they are not homes to dwell in. When thoughts and deeds repeat more than once, the third one is already searching, reaching for novel experience and then for the next confirmation. In these lean times this reaching for more may be no more than untimely distraction. The way things behave implies a way being followed. The rule here might be that the odd will try to get even. Two half-full bowls can together pretend to be plenty, but three suggest a new bowl. Two of the three get a break from the oddness, and one who goes finds a companion. More is not always merrier when what we need now is to concentrate.
41.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.4: estranged, meet someone unique, share trust)
Decreasing those sufferings To take charge and expedite becomes happiness This is not a mistake
41.4x Decreasing those sufferings: Truly asking for happiness Sometimes what we prize beyond all else are the pains of our being so very special, our passions for sorrows and failings, our bondage to weakness and ills. These are greatly valued as treasures, and highly regarded as pets. They bring the neighbors around to help out. They give conversations a place to begin. Friends like to scratch the ears of the ones with sad, little faces. A good illness can keep our friends busy for days. Many are the strange relations between the artist and his form of abuse. One's troubles are not dismissed lightly. But such suffering is optional and sanity grows elsewhere. It might be fine if one has time and nothing better to do. But this wants too much maintenance now. What better things to give up than the burdens, and sources of loss and exhaustion? Some selective predation will better the species.
302

41.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
(Fan Yao 61.5: being true is as good as bond, make no mistakes)
Somebody grants one ten matched pairs of tortoise shells One cannot refuse Outstanding opportunity
41.5x Six fifth's outstanding opportunity: Assistance from above You perform what you think a small sacrifice, then you reap an enormous reward. Yet one who is increased in wealth is only given the task of guarding the way wealth will dwindle. There is no such thing as a wealth which stands still and alone. For the shells to give up their omens, one shell at a time is heated up, cracked and destroyed, becoming quite useless for anything else. Intact, they were useful only for turtles. Even gold by itself just has weight, takes up space and colors the light a bit yellow. Would you put cracks in these shells just to question your fortune? Their value is in their spending, in losing them to your own best advantage. If you already knew this, and it was known that you knew this, then perhaps the one who gave them up knew they would not be wasted. Believe no more than you'll need to believe here.
41.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.6: authentic commitment, promising, nothing wrong)
Avoiding decrease increases one Not a mistake Persistence is opportune Worthwhile to have somewhere to go But one gains servants rather than family
41.6x Avoiding decrease increases one: A well-earned objective When wealth is not bound to inferior rules, giving and taking both lead to a profit. An economy slowly builds itself up when its circulation is free. Anyone can prosper at times, but in order to sustain this without relying on undiminishing growth rates there are a few rules and prerequisites. Those who are in charge must be kept in a position to lose everything that they own: never leave them unaccountable for their errors in their judgment. Then tax what you want less of and not what you would increase. If government and management exist to solve our problems, then to tax away the problems will shrink these burdens down. Learn to gain in ways where everyone wins and learn to lose to advantage. Remember that a shrinking demand mimics the growth of supply. And never forget that the greater good includes you.
303

41, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 31, Xian, Reciprocity qian gua (inverse): 42, Yi, Increasing jiao gua (reverse): 31, Xian, Reciprocity hu gua (nuclear): 24, Fu, Returning shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
41, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Assiah of Briah * Tarot: Princess of Cups * Astrology: Caput Draconis in Water
41, Quotations * You have learnt something. That always feels at first as if you had lost something. --G. B. Shaw * Less is more. --Robert Browning * The ability to simplify means to eliminate the unnecessary so that the necessary may speak. --Hans Hofmann * Economy is a distributive virtue and consists not in saving but in selection. --Edmond Burke * I started out with nothing. I still have most of it. --Michael Davis * I wanted to live deep and suck all the marrow out of life ... to drive life into a corner, and reduce it to its lowest terms. --Thoreau, Walden * Our life is frittered away by detail ... . Simplify, simplify. --ibid. * Power provides according to your impeccability. --Carlos Castaneda, Tales of Power * Fortune can take from us only what she has given us. --French proverb * Economy is too late at the bottom of the purse. --Seneca
304

GUA 42, YI4, INCREASING
Binary 100 011 = 35; Zhen below, Xun above
42.X, Overall Image The wind and the thunder Increasing The noble young one, accordingly,
When seeing the good, as a rule, makes improvements When having transgressed, as a rule, makes corrections
The breezes seem to run errands for the young sprout below, bringing it windfalls, food and rain from afar, and later, distributing seed. Opportunities are everywhere. The tree reaches out at both ends, spreading its roots and its branches, gaining more access to more of the world. To grow we reach into something greater than we are. The wise will find plenty of options to build their lives out of choices. And since so much is available, they can even pick and choose. In growing a better life, they might even give up as much as they gain, pass by as much as they take, and settle for only the best, for a single gem instead of twelve rocks. The great cost is paying attention.
42.0, Increasing Worthwhile to have somewhere to go Worthwhile to cross the great stream
The air is full of clues to the meaning of life. Our cultures are full of clues to what we might do with this life. Your gifts will fall to your lot freely given, as if they had fallen from heaven. But they'll have no value or meaning until they are wanted and taken, accepted and put to a use. To gain is to learn how to better receive, to take a gift with gratitude, to honor the gift by wanting what can be done with it. Growth does not need to mean that size changes: when we learn to unlearn what no longer serves us, we may even get smaller and better, do more with less and yet hold more of the world in our grasp. But our job is to give these gains value, and not merely learn they are there. Options, models, tactics, ideas and tools are all free, except for the effort of picking them up. Not everything has been thought, said or done yet, but our records keep getting better, so some of the things we could do, especially bad ideas, no longer need to be tried. The wise ones will move through their multiple choices with a healthy self-interest, just as unable as anyone else to give what they have not first taken. And several whole, wide worlds are out there just for the taking.
305

42.M, Key Words Extension, diversification, broadening, advantage, empowerment; gain, increase Enrichment, smiling fortune; enhancements, benefits, gifts, windfalls, gleanings New access, input, options, choices, alternatives; learning, accepting, growing Receiving generously, taking well, using the gifts, appreciation, blessings to count Positional advantage, leverage, purchase; to glean, profit, augment; faring well Gain also as an increase in sensitivity to signal strength, amplification, expansion
42.G, From the Glossary yi4 (to) add, advance, augment, benefit, enrich, expand, fill (up), further, gain, give, grant, grow, increase (by), progress, promote, profit, reinforce, replenish, restore, strengthen (to) (s, ed, ing); (a, the) addition, advantage, augmentation, benefit, enrichment, expansion, gain, gift, grant (of), surplus, overflow, increase, profit, value; (to be) beneficial, gainful, profitable, increased, advantageous, augmented, progressive, restorative, useful; expansive, rich; additionally, more, all the more, expansively, further, increasingly; more and more
42.T, Tuan Zhuan Increasing
Decreasing the lofty to increase the humble The people's satisfaction is not a limitation From the lofty down to the humble Such a course (is) highly exemplary Worthwhile to have somewhere to go: Concentration (and) uprightness will be rewarding Worthwhile to cross the great stream: The nature of wood leads to progress Increase moves while adapting The day's progress is not a limitation Heaven confers, the earth brings forth This increase is without directives The general increase is that of the way, Sharing the time (and) moving in union
306

42.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.1: childlike perspective, little people blameless)
Worthwhile and productive to perform great deeds Excellent opportunity Without errors
42.1x (An) excellent opportunity (to be) without errors: (To be) humble regardless of weighty concerns Looking up from nearsighted labor, he finds there is a better way, to do three times the work with only a third of the effort. The forest full of mighty trees turns out to be easy to plant: seeds and some water, humility, patience and time. At the bottom there is yet no great enterprise, it is not the place for greatness, although great things can begin here. Knowledge is power, but it costs so very little. The vision, the deed, and the energy used for doing the deed: all these are enabled by power from the sun. It is to this star that the deed is best dedicated. The light is the power, the author and glory, not us. Even our notions of greatness might not be all that mature: we seem to enjoy inflating these things and putting ourselves at the center. Greatness is there for the asking. But one who thinks himself mighty should try pulling oxcarts around.
42.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
(Fan Yao 61.2: call of crane in shadows, her young respond)
Somebody grants one ten matched pairs of tortoise shells One cannot refuse Enduring commitment is promising The sovereign presents offerings to the divine* Promising
42.2x Somebody grants this: (It) comes from beyond There is a resonance in this, a connection of the spirit, and even these special shells are entrained in the pattern. They have found their way into your hands as blessings, to count but not question. This wealth is a trust and one wants to be worthy. Even the king serves this process. Since each shell is used only one time for one question, you could use many shells up in just asking why, and still there might be no why. To question the rightness of this is to spend it on the past. Thus it is probably best to keep this increase going in forward directions - by asking questions of how and when best. A treasure map can be as good as the treasure, without having all of that weight yet. The sovereign will want his good name to have a respectable place on his ancestor's shrine, but he doesn't ask why it's not there yet. This is for tomorrow.
307

42.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.3: familiar ones scolded, regrettable, opportune)
Increase comes by way of unfortunate events Avoid errors Hold true and focused in conduct Report to the prince, offer the jade credential
42.3x Increased by way of unfortunate events: Certainly hold this (in mind) The good doctor earns his wealth and repute by taking a sort of advantage of the ill fortunes of the sick and the dying. The advocate thrives on misunderstandings. The hero will launch his reputation on somebody else's mishap. The heir will take advantage of death in the family. But this does not soil their characters, until they begin to encourage the illness, feed the strife, cause the disaster or do harm to the rich, old uncle. Misfortune creates real needs for somebody to take care of, and to salvage a bad situation merits a reward, a finder's fee or a bounty. But wherever this might be abused, the public asserts a right to preserve its level of trust. It only takes one fireman starting one fire to put a noble profession under a harsher light. Trust and respect aren't easy to add to. Much decrease grows from small doubts.
42.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.4: may there be loyalty, not a mistake)
Centered in conduct Advise the prince to comply It will be worthwhile and practical to perform reliably
in moving the capital
42.4x Advising the prince to comply: In order to further the purpose He approaches his prince with the purest intentions, as though he too were a noble. He proclaims himself a reliable fellow, as an excellent choice for a helper in matters important to state, such as moving this kingdom's capital, and guarding the wealth on the way. He asks, in effect, to borrow a little political power, to further his own aims in life. His levelness and candor do more than amuse the prince. Great doors may open up, including the door to the vault. He will be given his chance to back up his claims. It would take a very pure fool indeed to plan any crafty or ugly surprises. Both the rewards and the punishments are proportionate to each other, yet both are out of proportion to the smaller acts which precede them, the acts which will lead to great increase in one or the other. Nearer the throne, they say, is nearer the gallows.
308

42.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.5: dismissing norms, not suited to great crossing)
Be true and kind-hearted Do not question sublime opportunity Be assured that kindness is our worth
42.5x Be true (and) kind-hearted, Do not question this at all * Kindness (is) our worth: A well-earned objective One's hunger for reassurance might only complicate things. If you want to know whether or not you tread the proper path, try asking yourself when your mind isn't listening in. Especially when your luck has turned to good. Do you really deserve to seize this day or this fortune? Who are you to judge your own worth or merit? If rewards are offered, collect them. And then, if they do not belong in your hands, just spread that good stuff around. Sometimes to take the thing well is the best gift to give to its giver, for those who must quantify gratitude. But to seek answers and confirmation returns us to doubt and self-conscious discomfort. The generous heart is in the right place and the purpose is already gained. Defining the gifts will only contain them and take them from circulation. The pipe carries more than the bucket.
42.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
(Fan Yao 03.6: four horses, tears of blood flowing like water)
Nobody increases this one Somebody assaults this one Adopting an inconstant heart Disappointing
42.6x Nobody increases this one: One-sided expression * Somebody assaults this one: (This) comes from beyond Not only does his one-sided taking bring no increase to him or to those around him, many will take great delight in crossing a distance through hardship, for the pleasure of punishing him. And even this far out of their way they might call it self-defense. It may be a kind of increase to have such a strange and intense popularity. It may be a kind of gain to attract some attention this way. It might be a kind of a power to put distant folks into such a bad mood. His reputation precedes him. This is the sort of person who, when seeing error, adopts it, because it can add to his size. This is not profit, only gross income - the bottom line is the net, but less all the damages done. This sort of thing gives a bad reputation to selfishness. But in fact, if done correctly, a more prosperous self will be a more generous self, and yet it won't be diminished.
309

42, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 32, Heng, Continuity qian gua (inverse): 41, Decreasing jiao gua (reverse): 32, Heng, Continuity hu gua (nuclear): 23, Bo, Decomposing shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
42, Notes * 42.2 Di could refer either to divine forces and powers, or to the lineage of worthy emperors as ancestors, especially Di Yi (r. 1096-1059) who may have been a part of the Zhou line of descent. In either case, even the sovereign answers to a higher power and is humble and respectful before this. An authentic gratitude is an important part of taking increase, gifts, grants or benefits well.
42, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Yetzirah of Atziluth * Tarot: Prince of Wands * Astrology: Leo Ascending, Fixed Fire
42, Quotations * Give me a lever and one firm spot on which to stand and I will move the earth. --Archimedes * Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime. --Chinese proverb * The art of acceptance is the art of making someone who has done you a small favor wish that he might have done you a greater one. --Russell Lynes * And I asked myself about the present. How wide it was, how deep it was. And how much was mine to keep. --Kurt Vonnegut, Slaughterhouse Five * A man who is so dull that he can only learn by personal experience is too dull to learn anything important by experience. --Don Marquis * Not what we say about our blessings, but how we use them, is the true measure of our thanksgiving. --W. T. I. Purkister * If you limit your choices only to what seems possible or reasonable, you disconnect yourself from what you truly want, and all that is left is a compromise. --Robert Fritz * The man who doesn't read good books has no advantage over the man who can't read them. --Mark Twain
310

GUA 43, GUAI4, DECISIVENESS
Binary 111 110 = 62; Qian below, Dui above
43.X, Overall Image The lake rises into the sky Decisiveness The noble young one, accordingly,
Dispenses favor to reach those below Resting on virtue is thereby avoided
The lake is as full of itself as it gets. Whether had or made too much of, some of the surcharge or surfeit must go, right over the top and away. This niche is simply not big enough. This might be a cherished illusion, some nasty old habit, the next in a long line of last weaknesses, a thing that we thought we would want more, a thing we have now had enough of. Whatever it is, it is tempting to reason against it with passion, instead of just getting it wrapped up and letting it go. This is the best time to move on a little more lightly: the sage surrenders his wisdom, the magus his book of spells. The young noble makes less of himself, not taking this all so personally.
43.0, Decisiveness A disclosure at the royal court A truthful appeal This will be serious Inform the home town Nothing worthwhile in resorting to hostilities Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
When we learn that something or someone among us must go, we do not then need to work ourselves into a frenzy or froth. Character and dignity should provide all of the force that we'll need. We do not need not to hate a thing first in order to set it aside. Troubles are most effectively banished by clear definition, not by obsessive behavior. Our wiser wizards will tell us that even those devils and demons are best brought under control by speaking their proper names. This is nothing mysterious. To understand where things begin and end is great power. To set yourself against a thing might exalt it or make you its victim. Credulity gives it weight, aggression gives it force, gossip gives it a voice and vagueness lends it a wit. Just a simple no will often suffice, or else high, truthful words at court, to get our unspeakable things truthfully named and back into proper perspective - and the rest of life pointed back in its proper direction. Until then we are not rational beings. Some resolutions are made with great force and commitment, but the word refers also to a crisp and clear light, and to putting things where they belong. These two don't need all that force.
311

43.M, Key Words Satiety, surfeit, having enough, finality, giving notice, parting verdicts and words Break off, conclude, uproot, expel, purge, express, denounce, renounce, condemn Discharge, remove corruption, vent, clean house, make a clean breast, outpouring Resolution, resolve, determination, commitment, single-mindedness, obsession Inclination to exaggeration, hyperbole, protesting too much; over the top; unload Indictment, disclosure, conviction, exposé, diagnostic; decisiveness, breakthrough
43.G, From the Glossary guai4 (to be) decisive, resolute, certain, committed, resolved, decided, serious, determined; (to) determine, decide, resolve, commit (to), indict, execute, cut off, censure, displace, purge, uproot, eradicate, divide, part ways, make a breach (s, ed, ing); (a, the) disclosure, resolution, decision (to), decisiveness, satiety; certainly, seriously, decisively, resolutely,
43.T, Tuan Zhuan Decisiveness
(Means) to break through The firm breaks through the flexible Dynamic but also persuasive
Breaking through and yet responsive A disclosure at the royal court:
The flexible rides upon five firm (lines) A truthful appeal, this will be serious:
This crisis will then be made known Inform the home town,
Nothing worthwhile (in) resorting to hostilities: What is valued (would) then be wasted Worthwhile to have somewhere to go: Firmness endures and then completes
312

43.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
(Fan Yao 28.1: cushioning with white mats, make no mistakes)
Vigorous in advancing the toes Going forward is less than successful Mistakes will be made
43.1x Without success and yet proceeding: Erroneous Maybe he wants to take a strong stand, or firm steps, or to stomp out that nameless threat, or even kick some troublesome butt here. There's trouble afoot in these times, or something is stepping on toes and this makes him hopping mad. It is high time someone did something. But even when powerfully done, advancing the toes does not make for great strides. Here should the whole being stride, including its head for guidance. While toes can test for obstacles too, the head has two eyeballs for seeing where it is going and a brain for thinking things through. The thing he chases might have a head as well. A little bit of wisdom used in advance might pause long enough to get the bigger picture and locate the source of the trouble. Then one can run, even race with the facts. Or maybe small steps, one at a time, will set a more useful pace.
43.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.2: complete the day, as change comes, expedite)
Frightened and calling out This is not a night for battle Do not worry
43.2x Do not worry about hostilities: Find the middle path There is a backlog of change overdue. One of these nights it might come without a clear warning. No need can be shown now for these haunted and sleepless nights. No unseen invader has given a sign. And yet he paces his floor, cries out for help and rattles his shields and swords at the night. Such guardedness, if not watched, becomes a way of life, already taking him prisoner. Of course he might be justified in fearing an attack might come soon, but even here his own worries will defeat him: his cries of alarm and his rattling swords are preventing him from listening for his enemy's approach, and it is also giving away all his defensive positions. If change is to come it can slip through this din unnoticed. Even defeat will not be this noisy. A foe worth fearing will be stealthier and darker than this. One wants to be rested.
313

43.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
Fan Yao 58.3: future joy, disappointing
Vigorous in the cheekbones Presuming the worst The noble young one is resolved and decided All alone in advancing, to greet the rain As if getting wet Were displeasure Nothing is wrong
43.3x The noble young one (is) resolved (and) decided: In the end no harm (is) done The relentless pursuer and the fugitive he pursues wear almost identical faces: too strong in the gaze, looking stubborn and obsessed, suspiciously nervous and tense. Their expressions of dark and mysterious purpose are not all that hard to confuse, except with each other. Both end their days much bespattered, and the subjects of much muddled gossip. The fugitive tries to look and act like a lawman, while the gendarme wants to think like his criminal. The signals they give are odd and unclear. Bystanders cannot decide who is who. They develop a very close bond in this way. This obsession of course has a purpose, hopefully one with an end and no future. Here and now is limited living and no place to be. This bad-looking hombre, with his wet-dog smell and his stubble, will not see the good life until the trial is over.
43.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.4: waiting in blood, get out of the pit)
A rump with no skin One's progress is inferior now To be led like a sheep, regrets would pass But to hear the words is not comprehension
43.4x One's progress (is) second-rate now: The position (was) not appropriate * To hear the words is not comprehension: Quick to hear (but) not much clarity In hottest pursuit, he chases his nameless, accursed, unspeakable thing into some deep, dark pit, thinking that he might have it cornered at last, all the while forgetting that accursed things thrive best and fight at their fiercest down in the deep, dark pits. Though now he is badly chewed up, and bloodied about the rear end, and moving forward is hard, he still remains resolute. And he still thinks that he is the predator here in this pursuit. He could try a new view of things, and wonder if he's being led like a sheep, as the predator toys with his prey, and then he could return to his flock to follow the harmless old ram. And yet when he hears this he still won't believe it. He really needs a new leader, one who is not such a menace to himself. If he would hand up our end of his leash we could drag him kicking and screaming to safety.
314

43.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
(Fan Yao 34.5: losing the goat with ease, no regrets)
Wild greens on dry land Determined to uproot To balance the behavior Is not a mistake
43.5x To balance the behavior is not a mistake: The center has not yet been honored Day after day the simple, old farmer wages his war of wills with the weeds, fighting the good fight on behalf of all of his crops, against that ever-encroaching wilderness. Too hard or too soft a pull will leave the weeds rooted; both too much and too little resolve will not work. Such care for his fields is not to be lightly dismissed. A firm resolution is called for in dealing with weeds. He will show them who is the boss. Of course the weeds would like to succeed as well, and so this big task will not end. This world needs all its small wills and stern frowns. But our farmer could use an epiphany here. Most of these weeds he uproots, like the wild spinach and purslane, are very fine things to put in a salad, and they volunteer up on the hillside where they never need any watering. Maybe all that he needs here is a better name than weed.
43.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.6: arrogant dragon will have regrets)
No cry for help The outcome will be unfortunate
43.6x No cry for help, approaching misfortune: In the end, not fit to survive He is lured far out and away, drawn way out to the distant frontier, to the limits of credibility, by his unspeakable thing. An obsession has taken complete control now. This far from his source, and just as far from rescue or help, his lines of supply are drawn increasingly thinner. He fades away with his footfalls and disappears with his vanishing trail. At this range his pride and presumptions run wild, and although he closes the gap on his prey, what seems an easy victory could become a silent end. To the cosmos he might have been always expendable, and possibly even unloved. But the unknown tree who falls for no ears at least has its forest to fall in, and the lonely stars in their waste of great power at least have the great sky to explode in. Without a sign or clue, the lost cause will be lost effect too, not intelligence gathered.
315

43, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 23, Bo, Decomposing qian gua (inverse): 44, Gou, Dissipation jiao gua (reverse): 10, Lu, Respectful Conduct hu gua (nuclear): 01, Qian, Creating zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 32, 50, 34, 14 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 3rd Moon (Apr)
43, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Malkuth in Briah * Tarot: Ten of Cups (Satiety) * Astrology: Pluto in Water
43, Quotations * At bottom, it has been an aesthetic taste that has hindered man the most: it believed in the picturesque effect of truth. It demanded of the man of knowledge that he should produce a powerful effect on the imagination. --Nietzsche, WTP #469 * It is more important that a proposition be interesting than that it be true. --Alfred North Whitehead * This rough magic I here abjure ... I'll break my staff, bury it certain fathoms in the earth, and, deeper than did ever plummet sound, I'll drown my book. --Shakespeare, The Tempest * They are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that starve with nothing. --Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice * All our final resolutions are made in a state of mind which is not going to last. --Proust * The lady doth protest too much, methinks. --Shakespeare, Hamlet * When you come to a fork in the road, take it. --Yogi Berra * It takes a great deal of elevation of thought to produce very little elevation of life. --Emerson
316

GUA 44, GOU4, DISSIPATION
Binary 011 111 = 31; Xun below, Qian above
44.X, Overall Image Beneath the sky is the wind Dissipation Rulers, accordingly, issue commands and decrees
in all four directions
The wind blows through the trees and the forest below, while heaven sparkles above. The random-seeming weather, while loosely observing all compulsions to order, will muffle and baffle both the sounds and the silence, and interfere with the sky view as both blanket and veil. By the time they have reached the ends of the earth, the king's clear commands are undone, and sound just like wind. Few of his orders will ever arrive unaltered, articulate or enunciate as he will. And thus he turns to redundancy, nature's defense against chaos, but bought at the cost of precious diversity. Order, pattern and purpose are somehow preserved. Some of this message might survive.
44.0, Chance Encounter The woman is powerful* Not at all useful to court this woman
The subtle advances to meet and undo the strong. The powerful woman proposing to you has also proposed to four others, turning all heads from all higher purpose. This could bewilder your whole set of wits. If you do not want your wits wildered you will not seek to mate with this creature. Of course she is only a symbol, of all of those things you ought not to pair with, if you want to hold on to your purpose in life. Entropy, too, is a kind of a power, but it's not one with which to wax mighty. Strength will want a stronger foundation than these light and breezy false promises. Wizards in witchy arms are in their own element, but anyone less will be a plaything or an experiment, with outcomes as unknown as the weather. Anything goes at night but she will sleep all day. Luckily power is also restraint and good timing. To settle for what seems like less must be done now or later, but now there is much more of less to be lost, or lots more of yourself to hang onto. This is not about women and men, although they do this so well to each other. The woman to whom a man gives his power is also the man to whom women give up their choices: only a diversion.
317

44.M, Key Words Interference, extenuation, attenuation, dissipation, distraction, complication, chaos Chance encounter, casual relation, affair, fling, indiscretion, seduction, temptation Entropy, randomness, undermining influence; squandering or adulterating order Mental promiscuity; coincidences taken too seriously as omens; loss of judgment Deferring, prioritizing, restraining self, abstaining; waiting for a meaningful affair Interposition, insinuation, persuasiveness; happening upon, accidental rendezvous 44.G, From the Glossary gou4 (to) couple, pair, connect, mate, copulate, meet (with), pair (up) with, come in(to) contact with, come in(to) conflict with, encounter (s, ed, ing); (a, the) (chance) encounter, (temporary) affair, (ad h oc) coalition; temptation, seduction, dissipation 44.T, Tuan Zhuan Dissipation
(Means) to encounter The flexible encounters the firm Not at all useful to court (this) woman:
Not suited to enduring together Heaven (and) earth encounter each other
(And) the varieties of beings join in the composition Firmness encounters (with) concentration (and) integrity
(And) all under heaven make great advances Chance encounter's proper timing (is) very important here!
318

44.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.1: lurking dragon, not at all useful)
Secured by a metal brake Persistence is promising Have somewhere to go Look at the unfortunate The weak swine is sure to dig in and struggle
44.1x Secured by a metal brake: The flexible nature (is) led along She has only to pass by at a distance and this lively beast is already ready to romp. But she is no sign from heaven, so he stops it before it begins, holds and hobbles his horses, sets his brake like some prosthetic patience, checking his behavior, his will with his won't. Motive is hardly life's problem, until futility and randomness get to it and wear it down. Sure, she is alluring, beguiling and attractive. But he'd only be led amiss, with his wantonness still wanting purpose. Any weak swine could loosen up and give chase here, or go whole hog after this trouble. But this is inferior force: his weakness would lead or be dominant. With no restraint he would have no choice but to go. If self-restrained, he can still keep the choices. To choose to go forth is only the question of when to let go. Persistence in resistance is promising.
44.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.2: bind them with rawhide, not one gets loose)
The creel holds a fish* Nothing is wrong But this will not benefit the guests
44.2x The creel holds a fish: Understandably not extended to the guests He has a rare fish in his tank, and his guests expect to be fed soon. But none will really blame him for refusing to feed them his pet. What worth has treasure when given away on a whim? His bright and wild concubine can think circles around the king, but when the king comes to visit, she will keep a dumb and coy silence, that the king might remember his kingdom. Yes, she is quite a catch, but she is not his to offer. Most any thing can be thought, and many of these acted out. Any wealth can be given away. But this theory does not need proving. Our urges do not need to turn into urgencies. He will keep the lid on and lights off. There is not even food for thought here. Of course as a child they taught him to share. And now he is all grown up and reserved, and parenting and saving himself. But probably not forever.
319

44.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao 06.3: incorporating long-standing virtue, steadfastness)
A rump with no skin One's progress is inferior now Brutal But not a complete mistake
44.3x One's progress (is) second-rate now: Advancing (but) now not being dragged She made him a very interesting offer, and he found that he couldn't say no. But he does not come away with a blushing bride: he'll barely get out of this with a lesson. He did not expect this when she first came to meet him. She appeared so soft and yielding, so harmless and sweet, not all bent out of shape in her mind and twisted up in her preferences. Indeed, that was a very bent night. Badly whipped about the thighs, lucky to escape with his skin, he walks with great effort now, but needs not be dragged. Note how today his footsteps all point the same way: he is learning to lead himself, a little more sheepishly now, which is probably for the best. She was right about one thing, though: he has been a naughty boy. No skipping or dancing, and maybe no sitting this month. He totters away out of danger, to find a cute nurse.
44.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.4: regrets pass, in field take three kinds of game)
The creel holds no fish Dawning disappointment
44.4x Wanting the fish in one's disappointment: (So) far from the others He thinks that he might be ready for some of those other fish in the sea. He may have a tank for his fish, but he has no trap, no bait, no line, no hook and no net, and none of that water that fish like to swim in. He might have a room with a roof, but where are the chairs and the candles, the wine, the music and the fire on the hearth? He has only a cubit-wide mat on the floor and he's only invited himself. Impatiently pacing his floor now, he might even wonder why random chance is taking so long. Maybe some sweet, young lady will wander by tonight, hungry and lost in his part of the woods. Does he want someone on call? Those are nearly as costly as wives, and girls on call walk the streets, not the trail. He has what he has asked for, but this can all be rethought. Restraint becomes an unnatural act and is itself the distraction.
320

44.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.5: cauldron's golden ears, rewarding to persist)
Wrapping the melons in willows Restraint is displayed They will have fallen from heaven
44.5x Nine fifth's display (of) restraint: (Of) concentration (and) integrity * (These) will have fallen from heaven: The intentions do not forsake higher purpose All of the members come to his meeting, and he acts like a model host, serving his fine food and drink. But all the green melons stay in the cellar, hidden from light and view. Still deeper down, and covered with cobwebs and dust, are many rows of tightly-corked bottles of wine. These melons and wine will one day be sacraments, as though they had fallen from heaven. But heaven is not simply a place, or even all places: it is all times as well, and the way times are strung together. There is much of not yet in heaven, but not much too soon or too late. These melons and wine, given our kind, but reserved, host's assistance, will fall from the time of just right, when heaven is ready as well. Haste is such a shallow thing, hardly worthy of sacraments. Just like these melons and wine, our very best is sacred, and worthy of our patience.
44.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
(Fan Yao 28.6: too much to cross, over one's head, blameless)
Encountering with those horns Embarrassing Though no harm is done
44.6x Encountering with those horns: The top (is) exhausted (and) embarrassed He has put all distractions aside and fought his way up to the top. He works at the peak of his powers, with no time or strength for diversions. And so he may be, in a roughish sense, blameless, when rebuffing what could be a warm encounter with harshness and cold. It is more than a little rude to welcome your guests on the tips of your horns. When alone for so long we forget all the measures and rules, while that horn will not be forgotten. This is nothing about his choice in a mate for life. But there is more to life than the work, and work and its fruits have meaning only when shared. This meaning does not have to wait for an end or completion, which might not even be coming if this much stress means exhaustion. Given these signs, it might even be worth the sacrifice to set the work down and try instead to relate.
321

44, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 24, Fu, Returning qian gua (inverse): 43, Guai, Decisiveness jiao gua (reverse): 09, Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts hu gua (nuclear): 01, Qian, Creating zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 31, 33, 49, 13 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 5th Moon (Jun)
44, Notes * 44.0 As fun as this symbolism is, this hexagram really isn't about the sexes or their battles. Nor is it about empowered or liberated women, even though women who fancy themeselves as such will almost invariably seize upon this notion. This is just a metaphor the authors used. It's about the good fight against dissipation or entropy, that describes both life and intelligence. Nothing is more distracting to higher purpose than attraction to the opposite sex. The symbolism was irresistable. * 44.2 The fish symbol usually refers to the unfair sex, although nobody has ever figured out the two reasons why. Anyone who has read the speculative history here knows that I think that women were well represented among the Wu Xian (congress of shamans) who authored the Yi. I also think that the authors had a healthy and well-developed sense of humor.
44, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Hod in Yetzirah * Tarot: Eight of Swords (an amusingly similar image) * Astrology: Mercury in Air
44, Quotations * It is easier to stay out than get out. --Mark Twain * She's the sort of woman who lives for others - you can tell the others by their hunted expression. --C. S. Lewis * How savage is love that plants a flower and uproots a field; that revives us for a day and stuns us for an age. --Kahlil Gibran * No temptation can ever be measured by the value of its object. --Goethe * One cannot ascribe the most basic and primeval activities of protoplasm to a will to self-preservation, for it takes into itself absurdly more than would be required to sustain it; and, above all, it does not thereby preserve itself, it falls apart - the drive that rules here has to explain precisely this absence of desire for self-preservation. --Nietzsche, WTP #651 * Nothing ever really sets human nature free but self-control. --Phyllis Bottome * O woman, perfect woman! what distraction Was meant to mankind when thou wast made a devil! --John Fletcher * For the most part we allow only outlying and transient circumstances to make our occasions. They are, in fact, the cause of our distraction. --Henry David Thoreau
322

GUA 45, CUI4, COLLECTEDNESS
Binary 000 110 = 06; Kun below, Dui above
45.X, Overall Image The pond is raised above the earth Collectedness The noble young one, accordingly,
puts aside weapons and instruments Guarding against unreadiness
A reservoir on top of the earth, held in place by our efforts, will offer us respite and sanctuary, a gathering ground for our waters along their way to the sea. If the banks are secure and the inlets welcome water, fulfillment becomes overflow. Erosion will be the more natural state: wear and tear on our confidence. Maintaining our sense of security, a level of collectedness, is work for our kind, alone or in groups. In good repair we stand ready and worthy to receive. But the object here is to get on with life. Too much can be surrendered for common grounds and waters. We'll want to stay able to hold our waters together, but not so dammed up that we can't come and go.
45.0, Collectedness Fulfillment The sovereign approaches his temple Rewarding to encounter a mature human being Making an offering Worthwhile to be dedicated To offer great sacrifices is promising Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
The cup is emptied and cleaned, in order to receive the new. The sovereign repairs to the shrine of his ancestors, with a prayer to come back infused with new strength, to face his people and heirs. To create and maintain these tribal and cultural bonds, a security in numbers, is a radial point of his work and the focal point of his people. The great man brings the great offering. We hope that he understands here that the great sacrifice is not the great man himself, but only his self-importance. The king is the supplicant here. His sacrifice is made for a common good. Unity is an immense reward, security for the tribe, cohesion for the realm. What is this sacrifice worth? Answer these first: A unity of what? Dedicated to what? These shared lives remain individual lives, held together by choices. The unity in a flock of sheep will serve the shepherd well, and those who want mutton and wool. But what is called the common good will not always serve the sheep. His reasons for the gathering here may not be the reason for its success. The greatest gift you can offer the ancestors is to become a great one yourself. This isn't done by giving up too much, certainly not the center.
323

45.M, Key Words Gather together, assemble, collect, congregate, consolidate, concentrate, convene Banking, shoring up, saving, pooling, collective strength, convocation, assembly Safe numbers; reserve, reservoir, contingency fund, sanctuary from insecurities Trusting, settling doubts; risk readiness, insurance, assurance, caching provisions Confidence, composure, self-possession, integrity, security, sang froid, aplomb Pulling it / yourself together; having / holding it together; comportment, dignity
45.G, From the Glossary cui4 (to) gather, assemble, unite, collect, bring together, pull together, bundle, cluster, convene, integrate, concentrate (s, ed, ing); (a, the) gathering, assembly, assemblage, congregation, collection, crowd; security, unification, collectedness, self-possession, confidence, assurance, composure, reintegration, integrity, concentration; bunch, bundle, cluster, multitude of grasses; (to be) thick, close-set, dense; "pulling it together," "holding it together," "having it together"
45.T, Tuan Zhuan Collectedness
(Means) to congregate Acceptance behind satisfaction
The firm (is) central (and) resonant Hence, congregation The sovereign approaches his temple: To convey the filial offering Rewarding to encounter a mature human being making an offering: Concentrating with integrity To offer great sacrifices (is) promising, Worthwhile to have somewhere to go: Agreeing with heaven's higher order Study the reason to congregate Then heaven (and) earth (and) the myriad beings
Will now have natures (which) may be seen plainly
324

45.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.1: standards change, leave the gate to interact)
Being true is not the end of it If confused, then pull together As a cry for help And one helping hand restore good humor Do not worry Progress is not an error
45.1x If confused, then pull together: One's directions (are) confused The gathering grows complex and confusing. The little one, true to his nature, first follows this and then follows that, without a ruling direction, even to go to and fro. In a growing mess of wrong turns and digressions, he loses all sight of his leader. The lost and lonely perspectives won't help him find his way: frustration and panic are too overwhelming. Then he might reach out to all the wrong strangers. Whether puppy or monkey or human, lost children are born with the wisdom to call out for a paw or the hand of someone familiar. Inborn insecurities restrain them each time out to only a little bit more of the world. Some of the reason to not worry here is that life has this already partly in hand. Insecurities might serve our needs as often as setting them aside or putting them behind us. A want of reassurance helps hold us together.
45.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.2: oppressed at feast, red sashes, offer sacrifice)
Drawn to the promising Not wrong But sincerity precedes the real reward
when offering the modest spring sacrifice
45.2x (To be) led by the promising is not wrong: The center has yet to evolve When we are at our best, feeling strong and mature, we might more often be led by what we can give or sacrifice than by what we can get or take from the things that are catching our eyes. The notion of promise might only enter our minds as something we make, not see. But when we are at our best, we know we are already full, and are grateful to have our needs met. To offer a great sacrifice is not to look first for what we are promised. And then to be drawn or led by the promise is something like our prey being led to our traps by our bait. One following even true heart's desire won't always look where he's going. Some sort of goal is expected of movement, even the moves of pure wisdom. Wits are better collected around something that's up ahead. It's always best to give something in order to merit reward, even if only a thank you.
325

45.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.3: persuaded in loins, managing consequences)
It seems that to congregate is the same as complaining Not a direction with merit To continue thus is not harmful But a little embarrassing
45.3x To continue( thus) is not harmful: The superior (is) adaptable How could they gather without him? He has grievances to share. He needs friends. Maybe he seeks to join the wrong congregation. He cannot stimulate enough pity. At some lesser sorts of gatherings, the people can huddle together and yet become even less than they were. An association of victims of this or that thing might serve some transient purpose, but membership here should be temporary, with programs for going beyond. Commisery does love its company, and will happily enroll you, long term, in the woe-is-us healing process. But where the group is healthy, it might be looking for members with something better to offer. Why would they desire to open their gates to the whiners? The loud, plaintive sighs are disturbing the speaker. He'll need to meet them halfway, by composing himself into someone they want.
45.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
(Fan Yao 08.4: outwardly joining, commitment promising)
A lot of promise Avoid mistakes
45.4x A lot of promise, (but) avoid mistakes: The position is not appropriate This congregation offers it all: a security of the spirit and a fellowship of the saved, with almost no work, at only a moderate cost, plus many convenient payment plans. The priest occupies an attractive position, assembling others on another's behalf. He needs not even be wise, as long as he follows the program. The miracles were done long ago. Today he can give them water and tell them that it is wine, or he can give them wine and tell them that it is blood. And these people really believe him. If he tried this at his own affair they would not respect him so much. They do not want him to try to be just himself. In the temple things are different, they come to be fooled, and not without reason. There is a point to which this serves a purpose. Sheep should not try to think. For others, an end to the fear is courage to question.
326

45.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
(Fan Yao 16.5: persistent affliction, chronic but not fatal)
Convening presumes a position This is not wrong But an absence of trust Means extremely prolonged persistence Regrets pass
45.5x Convening presumes a position: The objectives (are) still not conspicuous Somebody needs to bring this convention to order. Everyone looks to the podium, most with high expectations. But in between now and the time the audience leaves, there should be one to step up and fill this position. The speakers have a head start: the benefit of assumptions that one who has nothing to say worth hearing will not be invited to speak. The place itself brings them this far, past more than half of their reasons to fear and doubt. The minister has only to pull the rest of himself together, his notes, his wits, his courage and self-esteem, and then simply find a trust or faith in a system set up to do this. You can't take trust out of this picture. Until the audio program begins there is no audience yet. How great must this sacrifice be? It may be safe to assume he can trade his fears and his doubts for equal amounts of success.
45.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 12: Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.6: overcoming separation, denial, then rejoicing)
Offering counsel while weeping and sniveling But no harm is done
45.6x Offering counsel (while) weeping (and) sniveling: Less than secure at the top Maybe something went wrong at the gathering. Perhaps he tripped on his tongue, or maybe they laughed at his sacrifice. Whatever it was that he gave up has not yet brought lasting good fortune or luck. Now he pours out his distress, and all of that spirit that filled him, the hope alongside the dread, the certainties and the fears: all of that unspent feeling becomes a little puddle of salty self-importance, growing at his feet. But he gets it all out of his system this way, making room for a little more gratitude. This may bring others around, thinking they might have misjudged him, but if their warmth is founded on pity, the gathering might just be pitiful. Better to let him let go, to turn himself upside down and get empty. Ideals we have sacrificed for, security for instance, can often be the same things we need to give up to get true.
327

45, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 26, Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts qian gua (inverse): 46, Sheng, Advancement jiao gua (reverse): 19, Lin, Taking Charge hu gua (nuclear): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family 45, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Kether in Briah * Tarot: Ace of Cups * Astrology: Saturn in Water 45, Quotations * I am an old man and have known a great many troubles, but most of them never happened. --Mark Twain * Trust in Allah - but tie your camel first. --Mohammed * A single arrow is easily broken, but not ten in a bundle. --Japanese proverb * They that can give up essential liberty to obtain a little temporary safety deserve neither liberty nor safety. --Benjamin Franklin * To bear all naked truths / And to envisage circumstance, all calm That is the top of sovereignty. --Keats * To keep oneself safe does not mean to bury oneself. --Seneca * Yet in thy dark streets shineth the everlasting light / The hopes and fears of all the years are met in thee tonight. --Phillips Brooks * How much pain have cost us the evils which have never happened! --Thomas Jefferson
328

GUA 46, SHENG1, ADVANCEMENT
Binary 011 000 = 24; Xun below, Kun above
46.X, Overall Image Within the earth wood grows Advancement The noble young one, accordingly, is accepting by nature Collecting the small things as a way to the noble and great
The young tree slowly crafts itself underground. Invisible, hair-like feelers, sensing the least resistance, wrap and entwine the stones, becoming green shoots and then harder wood. An intelligence presses to exact and build with the smallest available things, each new molecule a little attainable goal to add up into a tree, reaching up for the sunlight. Thus beings add themselves upward, making their flesh out of dust and their wood out of water and wind, slowly improving themselves and their positions with a series of personal bests, going above and beyond their roots. Steady forces adapt and ingrain the true. Wise ones will not disregard the smaller developments.
46.0, Advancement Most fulfilling Productive to encounter a mature human being Do not worry To go boldly southward* is promising
Where a seed falls and sprouts is seldom much of a choice. Where we might find our various niches may also be somewhat haphazard, but sense and humility help. But next comes the time to make yourself what you might be, to occupy that place with living nerve, to extend and realize a self. This wants some boldness and skill. Wood pushing upwards grows with what is ingrained, it has the direction it needs. Each animal too is born with the right to strive to be the best and the most unequal that it can be. This boldness faces south, with the sun in its face, like the sovereign giving commands. Willful intelligence drives a willing response. We dare to seize our chances. Of course the big, quick, easy success will not be that great of a goal, no more than just wishing for luck, so what we are really asking for here is a lot of humbling work and the wisdom to find and follow the best examples and teachers. And great ends are often a long way away, so there is the question of pace. These will make a distinction between boldness alone and boldness that leads to success. Only the few achieve greatness, but the noble effort to live well is worth a life too.
329

46.M, Key Words Ascend, climb, mount, improve, upgrade; to rise above, build up, make up, add up Ambition, boldness, opportunism, preferment, taking of advantages, surmounting Developed proficiency, skill, mastery, competence, training, elevation, graduation Practice, education, edification; accretion, assimilation, constitution, construction Self-betterment, improvement, personal growth & bests; raising / rising standards Elevate, promote, overcome; graduated task; paced efforts, measuring of progress 46.G, From the Glossary sheng1 (to) advance (on, upon), promote, ascend, climb, arise, rise up, rise above, move upward, go up, step up, improve, mount, lift up, accumulate, save; issue forth (s, ed, ing); (a, the) advance, advancement, promotion, improvement, ascent, climb, step, increment (s); a measure of capacity; [to invest in potential energy] 46.T, Tuan Zhuan The flexible uses the time to advance
Adapting and also accepting The firm (is) central and resonant This is, accordingly, very fulfilling Productive to encounter a mature human being, Do not worry: Own the rewards The southern expedition (is) promising: The intentions (are) carried out
330

46.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.1: pull up thatch grass roots, by cluster, expedite)
Well-favored advance Great opportunity
46.1x Well-favored advance (is) a great opportunity: A higher (and) unifying purpose He begins the push upwards and pursues the objectives he wants. To the surprise of some, he encounters broad welcome instead of resistance. He is offered a hand and leg up. They recognize this up above as the promise of youth and gladly offer their aid. The attitude is the thing. The stones which require the seedling to turn in its path will one day anchor great roots. The young one seizes his day. Selfishness is not itself a bad thing: it only gets its bad name from those who practice it poorly. Sometimes we give best by taking, exalting provider as well as provision. Nobody asked that he do this alone. No rule says you can't make good use of your friends. Thus he takes his gifts and applies them, making excellent use of people he knows. Of course this encouragement grows a little more rare once he surpasses the middle.
46.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity
(Fan Yao 15.2: expressing modesty, persistence is promising)
Sincerity precedes the real reward when offering the modest spring sacrifice
Nothing is wrong
46.2x Nine second's sincerity Will find happiness He asks the divine and the spirits for intercession on his behalf. Not only this, but he also doesn't bring very much to the altar. While he knows that he can do without more than he wants to give up now, he would rather save this for startup and seed for his venture. What kind of modest is this? While folks in the temple in town are offering seed to the lord of the sky this spring, this one is out in the field, reverently planting his seed in the ground. This sort of modest is goal-directed and thoughtful. This modest spring offering will allow for autumn's more generous rites, when time is much better suited to giving and gratitude both. What is sacrificed now will grow no greater, not into bushels of gifts. It's about the next step, not the last, and what really needs doing now. Spring is time to get growing. Spirits want him to do this.
331

46.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.3: militia likely to transport fatalities, misfortune)
Advancing upon an empty town
46.3x Advancing upon an empty town: (This is) no place for doubts This certainly seems too good to be true, and maybe a lot like a trap, or what's left of a plague. He and his boldness will have at least one awkward moment this day. In getting to this position, errors of course have been made, and these will tend to make caution a part of believing in luck. The boldness which he must use now, or lose, is not some trait he'll get to use often, but this is a chance to either take firmly in hand or let it slip from his grasp. And let him not ponder long: once rumored, this big chance is gone. Appropriate now has two meanings, and they'll pull him in both directions. The limits here are not obstacles, but of imagination and nerve. Progress here is so easy he feels he is missing some steps. Is this lack of challenge so bad? Perfect the claim first. There'll always be the challenge of becoming worthy enough.
46.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua* 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao 32.4: a hunt without game)
The sovereign makes offerings at Split Mountain* Opportune Making no mistakes
46.4x The sovereign makes offerings at Split Mountain: Accepting service He has lived the life of a simple climber and he climbs when his heart says to do so. His fingers and toes are at home in the cracks in the stone. He only wants to better the person he was last week. Distinction is not on his mind. But a rumor now says this has made him the best in the realm. And therefore he takes a call from the king to bear the latest sacrifice all the way up to the sacred peak. His fortune is deserved. He began with the basics and ascended from there, with a true dedication, one step at a time. Honor, much like happiness, does not need to be a goal. Maybe these are not meant to be goals, but serve us best as consequents, reaffirming our true paths. To seek honor first might be more than backwards, if eyes on the prize are not on the climb as well. His purpose can now take another step up, if it can rise above this.
332

46.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.5: the well has a clear, cold spring to drink from)
Persistence is promising Advance is by steps
46.5x Persistence (is) promising (in) advancing by steps: A well-earned objective Each of the steps that he takes now, as he makes his way towards the top, might still take a similar effort. But each step now seems richer with meaning as the aims are nearly fulfilled. The toehold has more implications at the edge of the cliff or a shaft than it does in our steps on the road to the market. It might be enough to make one giddy and heedless. One may want to leap over, skip steps or jump to conclusions. But the way to success will double up on respect for the steps taken one at a time, like manageable little bites for the feet. Climbing invests in our energy's potential. Each step is a place to rest and hold gains. We build our reputations thus, gaining the greater access and vistas, as well as more to lose. The local alpine porter paces himself for the journey, and keeps enough in reserve for various ways back down.
46.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.6: not serving sovereign or noble, higher worth)
Blind ascent Advantage in not relaxing that resolve
46.6x Blind ascent to the top: Expending instead of accruing He drives himself hard in his climbing. This ascent has been done in the daylight, but at night his ambition is literally blind. The extraneous thoughts and perceptions are shed up here as useless weight, and what survives this ordeal will no doubt be fit, and tested right at the edge. How far life can move up is not a known quantity yet, and this will drive life up, into these altered states. Sometimes a whole new being or species is only one of its steps. But the rapture and challenge of such an exaltation will carry no heavy old goals. And perhaps some things will need to be lost up here. Perhaps this pushes us upwards: to lose the stuff that's not needed. This is what is conquered, transcended and left behind. Someone who thinks to have conquered the summit can't even get over an inferior delusion. This is the blindness to watch for.
333

46, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 25, Wu Wang, Without Pretense qian gua (inverse): 45, Cui, Collectedness jiao gua (reverse): 20, Guan, Perspective hu gua (nuclear): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
46, Notes * 46.0 The direction faced when giving orders or assuming command. * 46.4 Mount Qi, or Split Mountain, was the site of the Zhou dynasty ancestral shrine. Beside it was the homeland of the Zhou family ancestors. This is a zhi Gua reference (Gua 32: Heng, Continuity). Success is a function of alignment and consistency with the momentum of one's past, or one's experience and expertise.
46, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Hod in Assiah * Tarot: Eight of Pentacles * Astrology: Mercury in Earth
46, Quotations * Whatever you can do, or dream you can - begin it. Boldness has genius, power and magic in it.--Goethe * The safest opportunity for the average man to seize is hard work. --Arthur Brisbane * The world was always yours; you would not take it. --Archibald MacLeish * A wise man will make more opportunities than he finds. --Francis Bacon * What is work? And what is not work? are questions that perplex the wisest of men. --The Bhagavad Gita * Let us reverse the values: All fitness the result of fortunate organization, all freedom the result of fitness. --Nietzsche, WTP * Chance favors the prepared mind. --Louis Pasteur * I have always believed, and I still believe, that whatever good or bad fortune may come our way we can always give it meaning and transform it into something of value. --Hermann Hesse
334

GUA 47, KUN4, EXHAUSTION
Binary 010 110 = 22; Kan below, Dui above
47.X, Overall Image A lake without water Exhaustion The noble young one, accordingly,
invokes a higher purpose to carry out intentions
The lake drains into the deep, the tide goes out, the living powers ebb. There is little left to enjoy but smelly fish and slimy mud and those slippery and thorny personal truths, biting each other and making those sucking sounds. Joy is in serious trouble and gratitude seems to be too hard to find. Even the wise ones can suffer these ebbs. The exhausted sage is reminded that, to follow his will so completely, he risks both his life and his sanity. He wants to rejoice but is empty. One dream or one drive is all he has juice for. But where he finds his resources discharged, he may yet reach for resources not his own. And when caught in quicksand or mud, floating is best.
47.0, Exhaustion "Fulfillment" "Persistence" For the mature human being, a promise, Not a mistake But having the words is not the conviction
It seems only human to drape our stranger mysteries in gothic and romantic veils, but the foolish and the fatigued will invest the witch moon with too much mystique. When the tides go out or power recedes, once happy people moan about falseness and vanishing meaning, denying their lives with their words or bewailing that all the world is null and refuted. Things from these dark, pre-verbal depths are given new voices, even dark fears about one's own light. The power to rule them goes out with the tide. The sage, not unknown in this world, is exhausted in times of exhaustion, but he feels no bitterness, makes no speeches and speaks no promises that he hasn't the power to keep. He learns how to call upon primeval powers to float himself up and out of this muck. The greater part of this burden is just simple self-indulgence. Ill-will, resentment, rancor and enmity will all try to look like truth, though the truths needed now are things that will lift against gravity, and lots more fresh, clean water. Nothing is solid here, there is no core of firmness to speak to or from. Words keep changing their meanings. But at least the water pools first in the deeper depressions.
335

47.M, Key Words Surrounded, afflicted, beset, distressed, trapped, oppressed, cramped, hemmed in Hard pressed, squeezed; feeling defeated; running on reserves, vapors and fumes Victimized, bothered, disheartened, wretched, depleted, fatigued, weary, used up Lowest ebbs, dregs, being drained, spent; futility, pessimism, nihilism, suffering Depression; using the last ounce, getting the spirit back, lightening up, enduring Melancholy, delirium, illusion, despond, swamp gas visions, wits end, emptiness
47.G, From the Glossary kun4 (a, the) affliction, oppression, extremity, distress, exhaustion, entanglement, fatigue, anxiety; (to be) distressed, afflicted, beset, oppressed, surrounded, beaten, impoverished, diminished, belabored, bothered, disheartened, exhausted, fatigued, tired (out), vexed, trapped, besieged, surrounded, confined, entangled, pressured, constrained, hard pressed, pinned down, penned in, squeezed, enclosed, (nearly) defeated (by, in, with); extreme; (to) obstruct, distress, exhaust (s, ed, ing)
47.T, Tuan Zhuan Exhaustion
The firm (is) covered over To risk leads to satisfaction
(To be) beset and still not lose that which is fulfilling One who is truly a noble young one attains this Persistence (is) the mature human being's promise: By way of the firmness within There will be words but no assurance: To value the oral leads to exhaustion
336

47.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
(Fan Yao 58.1: responsive joy, promising)
With bottom belabored by a wooden cane Going into the valley of gloom For three years not seen face to face
47.1x Going into the valley of gloom: The gloom has no vision He gets himself spanked. He gets his butt whipped. This has really only hurt him the first time, the time that it actually happened. But now he plays the scene over and over again in his mind and the sentiment turns to resentment. The negative feedback loops him back onto himself, beginning a cycle of darkened mood that could last for the next three years. Such feelings do not know time, other than always and never. This valley of gloom is one deep depression, one truly great rut, surrounded on all three sides by high, insurmountable walls. As long as his attention is here, his back will be turned to the water's way out of the valley. Maybe he just wants to be beaten, or to be a beaten down soul. Maybe he secretly thinks that he deserves this, over and over again. How hard can turning around be? It is three years of this kind of effort.
47.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.2: drawn to the promising, sincerity before reward)
Oppressed before wine and food Scarlet-sashed nobles arrive with direction Worthwhile and productive to offer up a sacrifice Initiative seems foreboding But this avoids mistakes
47.2x Oppressed before wine (and) food: Balance will have (its) rewards He slouches at the feast, surrounded by good meat and drink, poking at his food. The nobles rush in on a mission, looking for help, offering great rewards for small favors, but the weary one lets them pass by unheeded. Maybe the wealth and good fortune would mess up his life. This may have been the answer he wasn't seeking, the chance to get himself snagged on something that was in motion, but the way out comes and then goes, and it's likely that they will only bother him once. The thing with the food set before him is that it's fuel. If he only could work up an appetite and sacrifice some of this stuff to his higher purpose. Or maybe he could sacrifice some of his losses and poor expectations. Jaded and sated mean having too much. How does he now have so little? Maybe starving himself is his way to grow hungry.
337

47.3, 6 3rd, Zhu Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
(Fan Yao 28.3: the ridgepole is deformed, ominous)
Oppressed by stones Grasping at thorny brambles Going into his house But not seeing his wife Unfortunate
47.3x Grasping at thorny brambles: Relying on the firm * Going into his house But not seeing his wife: Not a happy omen Does it give him that special feeling to have the world turn against him? His dark dispirit paints frowns on the stones. He fancies them cold to the touch and uncaring, weighing him down, rumbling and grinding and coming to crush and oppress him. He goes to great lengths to prove they will not support him. Hard-pressed between walls closing in, he denies himself even a handhold. Girding his loins with thistles, crowning himself with thorns, he will not need to look far for a cause to complain. Why not a hair shirt as well? At some time not so long ago, he even had a good wife, who waited for him to come home. Maybe she just grew tired and left, maybe she is just hiding until this phase of his passes. He may even consult us again, until he gets some even worse news, or until he can misrepresent something a little more cheerful.
47.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure
(Fan Yao 29.4: necessities handed expediently through the window)
Approaching slowly and gravely Oppressed inside a gilded chariot But this embarrassment will find an outcome
47.4x Approaching slowly (and) gravely: The purpose remains subordinate * Although less than properly positioned There will be support It exhausts him to handle his fine, gilded chariot. Perhaps he even feels as though he pulls the thing himself, still with the brakes on, of course, and yet all that he really needs to do is think a little and steer. If this lack of abundant energy were really the problem he wants it to seem, he could find a less transparent ruse. The slow-motion effort is far more exhausting than a far more exuberant pace, and this could take him four times as long just thinking and steering too much. He would even save energy if he just got out and crawled. Many responsible things remain to be done, so many plans that might fail. If he only had fewer friends he could count on. An end will be attained, but at embarrassing speed, with costs in horses and brakes. Good thing his horses don't bite. Do we even ask him why? What is he afraid of, or guilty about?
338

47.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.5: noble in bondage still holds freedom, promise)
Nose cut off, feet cut off Oppressed by rouge-sashed ministers And then gradually finding relief Worthwhile and productive to sacrifice this sacrifice
47.5x Nose cut off, feet cut off: The purpose is still not gained * And then gradually finding relief: Due to the center's (being) straightforward * Worthwhile (and) productive to sacrifice (this) sacrifice: To suffer happiness He is humbled by his own high position and tired out by his duties. His ministers do their best: they haunt his nights and oppress his days. They bathe him in tepid water and dress him up in special uniforms. They force him to walk to the altar and make his libations and offerings. What more could he sacrifice for them? They've even taken his nose and his feet. What is a poor sovereign to do here? What a fate for a great potentate! All the ministers get for their efforts is purple in their knees. But they always bow with such menace. This way is not working out well. Things are too circumscribed. Maybe he thinks he gives up too much for his people - but really he might just be thinking too much. Maybe he could give up these thoughts about sacrifice. The tepid baths could go too: maybe a deep tub with plenty of ice.
47.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao 06.6: winner is stripped of honor three times by noon)
Oppressed by creepers and vines Proceeding unsteadily and awkwardly Uttering "movement is regret" To own the regrets and go boldly forward is promising
47.6x Oppressed by creeping vines: A less than proper response * (If) movement (is) regret, have the regrets: A promising move Haunted and oppressed by mist and creeping vines, spooked and all tangled up in the futility of it all, it seems he tried to live and learn, but may have learned it wrong. Although one may be expected to regret actions past, it seems pretty silly to begin by regretting the future. It is also expected that dreams and fantasies fail. But these can fail and flop in the mind and end there and not make a mess in the world. That is what much of the brain is made for. Ghosts belong in the past. When they come at us from the future, something is turned around. Regret and remorse are supposed to only look backwards. Anxiety gropes for ways to account for their presence, like bad dreams make up monsters and demons. Paralysis will not get him out of this trouble. When the sorcerer gets hold of such things he has them spy or run errands.
339

47, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 22, Bi, Adornment qian gua (inverse): 48, Jing, The Well jiao gua (reverse): 60, Jie, Boundaries hu gua (nuclear): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
47, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Qoph; Path between Yesod and Netzach (Trad: Mk-Nt) * Tarot: The Moon (Low tide) * Astrology: Twelfth House, Mutable Water, Pisces
47, Quotations * Pain, indolence, sterility, endless ennui also have their lessons for you, if you are great. --Emerson * Sadness is almost never anything but a form of fatigue. --Andre Gide * Much of your pain is self-chosen. It is the bitter potion by which the physician within you heals your sick self. --Kahlil Gibran * And spring brought me the idiot's frightful laughter. --Rimbaud, A Season in Hell * And if there come unto them tender emotions, then do the poets always think that nature herself is in love with them; And that she stealeth to their ear to whisper secrets to it, and amorous flatteries; ... Some sensation of voluptuousness, some sensation of tedium ... they all muddle up their water, that it may seem to be deep. --Nietzsche, TSZ #39 * When we are tired, we are attacked by ideas we conquered long ago. --Nietzsche * Oh lonesome's a bad place / To get crowded into. --Kenneth Patchen
340

GUA 48, JING3, THE WELL
Binary 011 010 = 26; Xun below, Kan above
48.X, Overall Image Above the wood there is water The well The noble young one, accordingly,
labors for the people to encourage cooperation
Depth by design, and resource by way of resourcefulness. We penetrate this water in order to raise the water. The human clans gather and settle around these common sources, and through the common effort the village becomes an oasis. The resources that we share, the ways that we have adapted, the last few million years, the genetics of cooperation, our humanity itself: these give us ways to reach into ourselves and our fellows and draw out our best. But we also forget to use these things we share. We take them for granted. We forget to maintain them. Wise ones draw the people out, to demonstrate the uses of these resources, to refresh the shared understanding.
48.0, The Well Rearranging the town does not change the well Neither losing nor gaining, Whether leaving or arriving, the well is the well To nearly reach But then to fall short with the well rope Or to damage its bucket Is disappointing
The undercurrents and aquifers date to the ancient times. We became who we are when we learned how to access and share them, to reach down deep, into the nature of the one life we live. The commons are things which we've gathered around. They do not come to us. The well, like the bucket, the root or the book, are such enduring devices by virtue of their having only one moving part: a living creature who does all of the work, to draw upon their resources and to keep the sources in working repair. What we are able to draw out and take away from these centers is a function of our reach and our grasp, our understandings and comprehensions, our buckets and our ropes, our memories and our new questions. The sources stay available, but the well, not unlike an oracle, is a really lazy device: it will not force its waters, it will not roam around spewing out wisdom. When time has taken a toll, someone with appendages will need to repair it. But it will not make any effort at showing its gratitude. Its user must take up the task and go for the water, not for the forms. The town may change, but the well does not go roving about. Our humanity abides, regardless of cultures.
341

48.M, Key Words Source, plenum, spring, cistern, fountain, tap, pools; center, hub, nucleus, nexus Meeting place, commons; common ground, sources and pools; interdependence Basic service & maintenance; utility taken for granted, maintaining links to source Basic needs, truths, constants; replenishment, providence; be accessible, available Resourcefulness, resources at your disposal, getting to plenty; there to draw upon Developing character around deeper core; self-sufficiency, -reliance, -cultivation 48.G, From the Glossary jing3 (a, the) well, source, wellspring, nucleus, mine, center of social activity, constant; (a, the) well's; a system of 8 private fields around a center or commons 48.T, Tuan Zhuan To penetrate beneath the water and so bring up the water
(Is) the well The well provides, and yet will not be exhausted Rearranging the town does not change the well: Since this (is) using a constancy within To nearly reach, but then to fall short (with) the well rope (Is) to fall short of bringing up results To damage its bucket: This indeed leads to disappointment
342

48.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.1: waiting on the outskirts, using what endures)
The well's mud is not consumed An ancient well with nothing to take
48.1x The well's mud is not consumed: (It is) at bottom * An ancient well with nothing to take: In time, forsaken This drought is not helping this old well's reputation. The things that one finds in the well when it's this far down are better left unthought of. Between centuries and decades of slowly silting up, and passing cultures drawing the aquifer down, time is taking its toll on this venerable, old source, although it still endures deeper cycles than monthly rain and shine. Of course it will stay in its place, and not go to where it looks best. Time may not care what happens to the well, but it cannot be blamed for abuse. When the birds and frogs go elsewhere for water, it might be time to re-dig. Lots of questions might be asked here, about what might have gone wrong, but the answers all point one direction: there is no better time than a drought to make repairs on a well, to muck it out and dig it deeper. Time doesn't care, but in time, we must.
48.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
(Fan Yao 39.2: minister set back, interrupted, not one's cause)
The well is down low: shoot at the fish The bucket is damaged and leaking
48.2x The well (is) down low: shoot at the fish: Nothing to offer It's a low-down and dirty shame, that's what it is, degenerate and pitiful. Something so central as the source of refreshment is dying of pure neglect. This is not a fault of the time, although time bore helpless witness as apathy grew and distractions up on the surface of things took over with their own importance. As a resource, he has let himself go, and friends don't enjoy coming around: he just isn't refreshing enough. And these same friends could help rebuild his well. The good life has infrastructure: it wants a longer vision, beyond the shortsighted concerns, or beyond just one stage of life. At least the fish here indicate adequate water: the potential seems to be there. But this impasse will only be broken one way: a new beginning will need to be made alone. He must first become a little more worthy. Someone will need to take charge.
343

48.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure
(Fan Yao 29.3: coming, going, canyons, ledge is also headrest)
The well has been cleaned, but nothing is consumed Causing our hearts' sorrow It is suitable and available to draw from Were the sovereign made aware,
all might receive of this abundance
48.3x The well (is merely) turbid, (but) nothing (is) consumed: Passing in sorrow * Seek the sovereign's enlightenment: To receive the abundance Here is a clean, deep well, full of clear, cold water, but nobody's stopping to drink. Maybe the newly-cleaned well looks like it hasn't been tested and proven by time. Maybe it just has no reputation to go on ahead of it yet. Maybe the people are kept unaware by rumors and superstitions - about toads and the other slippery things that dwell in darker depths. Maybe it's still a little unsettled, more turbid than toxic, and just needs someone to get some flow going. At least the flow of information could use a little assist. Unappreciated value is not really value yet: the diamonds hiding deep in the dirt are just rocks. We cannot rely on the well to proselytize for itself. Something is offered but not being taken, an able person is not yet acknowledged. Is this water not expensive enough? They'll drink better water who treasure it more.
48.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
(Fan Yao 28.4: ridgepole holds up, to take more, deficiency)
The well is being relined Nothing is wrong
48.4x The well's relining is not a mistake: Renovating the well Good stewards set aside a time for posterity, to be worthier founders and ancestors. The well is now closed for repairs, shut down and torn apart, being newly relined in stone and tile. Today it is just a wound, just a crude hole in the ground, useless and muddy and ugly. Old forms and structures lie scattered around. But this is one full step beyond its decay, and many beyond the first digging. If these workers can be steady and careful they'll merit as much respect as they give. If they can take even longer, to do it better than right, the well will become an ancestral shrine. But if they weary of the work, they'll leave an inferior legacy. The heirs will have to start over, muttering, thinking less of the ancestors, remembering them as shortsighted slobs. The well-built character serves future generations. This is a way of paying our rent.
344

48.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.5: persistence is promising, advance is by steps)
The well has a clear, cold spring to drink from
48.5x The cold spring holds refreshment: In the center (and) correct This well-made well springs a big leak in the bottom. It's about as good as it gets. This certainly was a hole worth throwing some riches down into. Time was taken to do it correctly, care was found to find the right place and patience was there to dig the extra depth, with every tedious hodful of earth and every stone carefully placed. Now they'll have this cold, clear water to drink for the rest of their stay on the land. Even the old timers and the locals are stunned. The water is so clear and clean that the frogs get edgy and leave. It also explains all those old prayer beads they found, with glyphs of the dead being brought back to life. There can be no question now: if this is about someone's life, some difficult times might well be over. The water, the anima mundi, will be there to refresh and serve all who'll remember it's there.
48.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.6: subtleties under the bed, losing valuables, axe)
As the well comes in, do not cover Being true is most promising
48.6x Outstanding promise at the top: A great outcome He thinks to dig a small well for himself, so he calls in a stranger to divine the right place. The well has come in, and then some. Now his big problem is keeping the lid on his well from floating away. He will need no rope or bucket. He has already built several duck ponds. The neighbors take what they can. But still he has a small brook left over. The thing just keeps refilling itself and the water just keeps getting cleaner. There are times in this life when giving freely isn't just charity, when indiscriminate might be appropriate, when closure might not be a good thing, when compassion for all living things needs to be spread around. The well does not choose: it will serve a sage or a tyrant, a resident or a wanderer, peasants and sovereigns alike. To keep the lid on will only detract from the taste. We wish you well. Now give yourself away.
345

48, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 21, Shi He, Biting Through qian gua (inverse): 47, Kun, Exhaustion jiao gua (reverse): 59, Huan, Scattering hu gua (nuclear): 38, Kui, Estrangement shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
48, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Hod in Briah * Tarot: Eight of Cups * Astrology: Mercury in Water
48, Quotations * The gods help them who help themselves. --Aesop * Enough is as good as a feast. --Joshua Sylvester * It never occurs to fools that merit and good fortune are closely united. --Goethe * Mahomet called the hill to come to him again and again; and when it stood still, he was never a whit abashed, but said, "If the hill will not come to Mahomet, Mahomet will go to the hill." --quoted by Francis Bacon, "Boldness" * The well of Providence is deep. It's the buckets we bring to it that are small. --Mary Webb * Everything I am / I draw from you Battered old bucket / Dipping in your well. --Rumi * Lessons are not given. They are taken. --Cesare Pavese * Fortunate indeed is the man who takes exactly the right measure of himself, and holds a just balance between what he can acquire and what he can use. --Peter Mere Latham
346

GUA 49, GE2, SEASONAL CHANGE
Binary 101 110 = 46; Li below, Dui above
49.X, Overall Image There is fire in the lake Seasonal change The noble young one, accordingly,
organizes the calendar and clarifies the time
The noonday flame of the summer solstice sun penetrates deep in the lake, warming the water and setting the changes in motion. The next season comes upon us, just as we have begun to adapt to the last one. Time turns this world around, in continuous revolution, but succession proceeds in discernible stages. The turning of planets and stars will come first. Seasons lag six weeks behind, as the mass of this earth warms up and cools off more slowly. This might leave the unknowing always behind the times and looking for clues as to why things are changing so strangely. Clarification of time can help us to get ahead of ourselves, and sometimes caught up to the world.
49.0, Seasonal Change Complete the day and then be sure Supreme fulfillment is worth persistence Regrets pass
It begins to grow uncomfortably warm inside last winter's coat. The old is finished with its day: last season's pelts, callused old hides, cocoons and even great nations. Security in changing times is to know how securely time changes, knowing where the world has gone by learning how to read the signs. The clockworks of heaven is no toy to play with. We imagine it as our timepiece but cannot decide if it moves too slow or too fast. Just when we figure this out, and make our stable adjustments, the world moves into next season. We confuse the fresh with the antiquated. Sometimes we're seen destroying ourselves when insecurity threatens. To move change along among ourselves needs both tact and timing: belief only follows achievements, and human denial is a powerful thing. The old will not learn to yield to a process soon to replace it. A government will not be open enough to experiment with new forms. Every new generation owes itself one revolution, to break contracts it never made. The old hides are thrown off, we let our insides out, and the light bathes and cleans our feelings. A complete human being airs out the house, runs naked into the lake.
347

49.M, Key Words Strip, shed skin or fur, lay bare, molt, cast off, unveil, disburden; summer clothes Rawhide, leather, encrustations, shells; protective coverings, restraints, precedents Protective membranes dated, outmoded, no longer needed; calluses & callousness Obsolescence, anachronism, aging institutions; things resisting change superseded Change, renewal, overthrow, overturn, turnaround, revolution; reform, unburden Divestment, revisions, re-envisionings, renovations, metamorphosis, outgrowing
49.G, From the Glossary ge2 (to) change, alter, transform, degrade, take away, supersede, set aside, reform, replace, modify, amend, renovate, renew, revolve, change seasons, molt, shed (skin), have (had) enough, divest, strip, flay, peel, get rid of, cast off, eliminate, revolt, break with past, overthrow; (a, the) changing (of), revolution, seasonal change, animal hide, rawhide, skin, leather (not fur, implies hair removed); of change
49.T, Tuan Zhuan Seasonal change
Water (and) fire subdue each other Two women dwell together (But) their aims are not mutual gain So this is called seasonal change Complete the day and then be sure: Change and then believe in it Refinement (and) clarity behind satisfaction Great fulfillment (is) according to correctness Change is then appropriate One's regrets then pass Heaven (and) earth change and so the four seasons are fulfilled Tang and Wu changed the mandates Complying with heaven while resonating with humanity Seasonal change's opportune timing (is) very important now!
348

49.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.1: persuaded in one's big toe)
Wrapped with golden rawhide
49.1x Wrapped with golden rawhide: Not suited to taking action Like nearly everyone else, he still wears his golden ruminant suit and conforms to the ways of his herd, bound to earlier times, restrained by collective uncertainties. He tries to be docile, and grazes wherever he's led. But the summer sun rises high in the sky. His hide begins to feel wrong and the skin starts to tighten. He might still conform on the outside; inside he sweats and grows itchy, far too annoyed to sit and chew cud in the shade, furious at those who set fashions and trends. Like the time, he is getting ripe under there. To divest himself of this ill-suited nonsense is not a pleasant choice either, though even the slowest of cattle are starting to rub the fence. His hidebound behavior and morals are set against reform, without room to wiggle, as rawhide will harden into its shape. Meanwhile the rebels all get to wear loincloths.
49.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 43: Guai, Decisiveness
(Fan Yao 43.2: frightened outcries, not a night for battle)
Complete the day and then change arrives To expedite is promising Not a mistake
49.2x Complete the day (and) change arrives: Taking steps earns due reward Belief will follow attainment, as the summer will follow the solstice. People take time in catching up to the present. One who might be a star-gazer, or calendar maker at heart, will find it a little too easy to come back to earth three hundred years too soon. Visions of the better tomorrows are not shared by many today. So why stand on the corner now to share the good news with the people, or march boldly into the streets to be swept along with one's comrades in earnest and timely rebellion? Visionaries have lonelier lives than this, until they can refocus themselves to attend to the great beginnings, and hundreds of lifetimes of patience. The stones will grow legs and go dancing about before humans will welcome the changes. Thus we wait until we can point to the day when the old starts falling apart: it's time for alertness, not certainty.
349

49.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.3: bound to mature one, give up child for attainment)
To expedite has pitfalls Commitment is difficult When talk of change has circled three times Then be sure
49.3x (When) change (is) discussed three times all around: Given that, where is this?* It is not a bad thing that our cultures resist the latest hypotheses. To prove means to put to the test. If this new thing to come along were unmistakably true, it might not be so new - or the one to conceive it, so special. Theorized plans for global events will not find ready support until tested in village and province. The sage might have a plan, but he nurses the thing a while longer, collecting early data, filling in blanks and holes in the theory, waiting for critical mass, even for two more prodigies to also invent the idea. And then he might step up just to ask for a place in the background, to watch how the plan works for leaders. The world's pulse is taken first, and then action is timed to be resonant. Let someone else begin it: their echoes will tell of the timing. Then these ideas and plans grow like life, first from their roots and seeds.
49.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.4: silk jacket will wear to rags, on guard all day)
Regrets pass Stay confident Change the mandate Promising
49.4x Changing the mandate holds promise: Believe in the purpose He offers up an unheard of proposal and suddenly nobody's laughing. Being in the right place and time now, the decadent past is nearly revolting enough to them all. The truly great revolutions are the earth around its axis, and all this around the sun. All the best coups are bloodless. They'll call for the inevitable, the moment it comes due. The critical masses are ready, they'll cheer and pledge their support. Now all of those uncounted hands start to nudge the details into their places. The school, or the church, or the state which has outlived its useful lifetime is ripe for its reinvention. One creates with the least resistance now, while the world wants to turn in this way. But there may be reasons to make this more sweeping, to get more changes made. By next year things will be settled again: more change might again be much feared.
350

49.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.5: a pattern emerges, rewards and commendations)
A mature human being's tiger transformation Even before divining, be sure
49.5x The mature human being's tiger transformation: This one's style (is) evident The tiger molts boldly. His colors and stripes will leap straight into your mind, like sunlight and night, not needing any translation. The tiger does not need to seek out the oracle to ask about his timing, or run to find the shaman to read him the omens and signs. He does not need to worry if others will believe him. His gold and black will speak to the dimmest of wits. Strength is in evidence, explicit, lucid and ordered. The mandate is only a thousand words long now, new laws and guidelines are still crisp and clear: lawyers have not got to them yet, so they serve no hidden agendas. Changes are made by their author, and so they are made with authority. Our highest standards and clearest guiding principles are not pushed to the forefront of change by the masses. A cogent, commanding presence, even a hero, must carry them there.
49.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.6: fellowship with others on frontier, no regrets)
A noble young one's leopard transformation Ordinary people merely change masks To expedite has pitfalls To abide in persistence is promising
49.6x The noble young one's leopard transformation: This one's style (is rich in) subtlety * Ordinary people (merely) change masks: Submitting in order to follow a noble The leopard molts slowly and softly, his spots changing nuance by nuance, with a delicate sort of grace. But under this beauty is substance, not glamour: his changes go all the way through. Behind the soft smile are those sharp and dangerous teeth. This is beauty which speaks of a long line of big cats who did well enough in the toughest of times. This cat can just purr through these changes. Nobility shows to those who have need to see it and lesser beasts are content to just molt in the face, or approach wearing masks, averting their eyes, and trying not to make startled or jumpy movements. His inferiors will maneuver for whatever privilege and position remains, changing in loyalties and allegiances, according to where they would settle. The alphas of the group are still subject to change, only they'll make better subjects.
351

49, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 04, Meng, Inexperience qian gua (inverse): 50, Ding, The Cauldron jiao gua (reverse): 38, Kui, Estrangement hu gua (nuclear): 44, Gou, Dissipation shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
49, Notes * 49.3x In other words, why not wait at the destination instead of going in circles?
49, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Hheth; Path between Yesod and Tipareth (Trad: Gb-Bn) * Tarot: The Chariot (Summer solstice) * Astrology: Fourth House, Cardinal Fire, Cancer
49, Quotations * Time and I, against any two. --Spanish proverb * Almost in the cradle are we apportioned with heavy words and worths: "good and evil" - so calleth itself this dowry. For the sake of it we are forgiven for living ... . And we we bear loyally what is apportioned unto us, on hard shoulders, over rugged mountains. And when we sweat, then do people say to us: "Yea, life is hard to bear!" But man himself only is hard to bear. The reason thereof is that he carrieth too many extraneous things on his shoulders. Like the camel kneeleth he down, and letteth himself be well-laden ... . Then seemeth life to him a desert. --Nietzsche, TSZ * Those who make peaceful revolutions impossible will make violent revolutions inevitable. --J. F. Kennedy * Ah, but I was so much older then, I'm younger than that now. --Bob Dylan * An invasion of armies can be resisted, but not an idea whose time has come. --Victor Hugo * Trying to determine what is going on in the world by reading newspapers is like trying to tell the time by watching the second hand of a clock. --Ben Hecht
352

GUA 50, DING3, THE CAULDRON
Binary 011 101 = 29; Xun below, Li above
50.X, Overall Image Over the wood is a flame The cauldron The noble young one applies principles of positioning
to manifest higher purpose
As wood and wind feed the flame from below, the dumb log turns itself back into sunshine. Tending the flame is the alchemist, who has set things up to put heat and light to higher new uses. Positioned above the flame sits the cauldron. By formula and recipe, the raw stuff comes together, to converge in expected results, the higher purpose and principles to which these changes are offered. The wise are attempting to create a higher culture, by nourishing health and excellence, nobility and an ethic. The shamans, with potions and medicines, create the changes in their altered states. Knowledge as science applied must regard the present, but this will serve a purpose.
50.0, The Cauldron The most promising offering
The sovereign would rather rule a more highly developed culture. To this end, he can use his position, and what he knows about science, to nourish and bring out the best that is in his people. The sage tends the flame and the cauldron to secure the success of the offering. The formula that early alchemists looked for was at work beneath their crucibles the whole time they sought it above. They merely needed to make the analogy live, to apply it in broader ways. For the chef, as well, who would nourish humanity's promise: the first things he needs are fuel, a good draft of air and some sparks. And next, a place dedicated to change, raw spicy stuff and good appetites. The alchemy serves higher purpose and powers, the leadenness of our being turns into gold, into a life to which we give value; the belly turns food into light, a stew is transformed to serenity, courage and wisdom. Delightful aromas entice the spirits to help us. So what is sacrificed here, besides a few logs, and these basic ingredients, submitted for transformation? To sacrifice does not mean to lose things: it means to make them sacred. Thus the past is made sacred here, redeemed for a higher value.
353

50.M, Key Words Crucible, tripod, a sacrificial cooking vessel; consecrated or dedicated offerings Dedicated change, change by design, science as art; applied heat and knowledge Refinement, sublimation, purification, alchemy, the great work of transformation Symbol of dynastic foundation & creative power; nourishment of ability, nobility Pragmatic utility, specific utility; excellence by design, instrumentality, formulae Realizing potential in raw material, social engineering, creation of higher culture 50.G, From the Glossary ding3 (a, the) cauldron, sacrificial vessel, tripod, ding vessel, crucible, (consecrated, dedicated) transformation; [alchemy]; (a, the) cauldron's 50.T, Tuan Zhuan The cauldron
(is) a model With wood submitted to flame
The offerings (are) transformed The wise ones (are) fulfilled with offerings to the highest divinity
And (there is) great fulfillment (in) nourishing wisdom (and) excellence Reaching in with ears (and) eyes, quickening (and) clarifying
The flexible advances with elevated conduct Gaining the center and resonating with the firm And so this is, accordingly, supreme fulfillment
354

50.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.1: no deal with harm, to never be wrong is hard)
A cauldron with upended feet Worthwhile to expel the stagnating Accepting a concubine for the sake of her child Is without blame
50.1x A cauldron (with) upended feet: As yet nothing improper * Worthwhile to expel the stagnating: In order to attend to (what is) valued It might be a matter of principle to adhere to things as they are, for loyalty's sake, or abide by promises made at some earlier time. But when this comes to alchemy, and service to higher purposes, what stays fixed in time is the log or the lead, and neither of these is the outcome desired. The cauldron might be filled with hot food, but if the food is no longer good, the cauldron should be overturned. A noble might have a faithful wife by his side, but if she cannot give him heirs, the concubine can. The cauldron transforms the old, makes it entirely new, but blame sees only the past. The hope of transformation, indeed, the hope for our future, might lie opposed to a truth which is static or ritual. When it does, a better future can rightly be thought to come first, and the means which might be questioned today be justified tomorrow.
50.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
(Fan Yao 56.2: coming to camp, cherishing resources, get helper)
The cauldron holds substance Our counterparts have anxieties This is not in our scope of pursuits Promising
50.2x The cauldron holds substance: Be mindful of function here * Our counterparts hold anxieties: In the end, no reproach The nobleman on his journey is careful where he stays. His cauldron is small, but sufficient, his meal, sustaining and hot, and his flame is nearly concealed. Having learned to do more with less, good meals are the least of his worries. He will simply meet his needs in the order in which they're important. Somehow his satisfaction is making his rivals uneasy. He is envied by the wealthy for having no use for gold, and even reproached by thieves for having nothing worth stealing. These troubles are not his problem, but are as much a part of a camp as the bugs or the views. Our best can thrive on simplicity: we don't need to be gluttons here. Although it might take a great deal of wealth to sustain a noble class, a class is not what we mean by nobility. Noble ones work out their own problems first, then they lead by example.
355

50.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.3: not yet across, either go boldly or go across)
The cauldron's ears have been altered Its function is impaired The pheasant's rich meat is not eaten A sudden rain would diminish regrets In the end, an opportunity
50.3x The cauldron's ears (have been) altered: Disregarding their significance He's fashioned a fine looking cauldron, but the handles are all wrong, maybe placed according to artful ideals, with little regard for function and balance. Somehow he's missed the idea. So his cauldron gets stuck in the fire, as the fat pheasant gets stuck in the cauldron. Now will his belly begin to resent his artisic direction in life, as he watches his bird turn black. This could have been handled better. This is a bad way to sacrifice pheasant: it might as well be crow. Should he try out some frantic rain dance, hoping to quench the flames? Or is it time to learn to rely on something more pragmatic, or more scientific than luck? As he gnaws on cold, wet bird, he ponders designs for accessible cauldrons. A philosophy might look attractive, and sell, but if we can't use it it's not in reach. We need to get a grip, a grasp on practical things.
50.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.4: indulging father's fixations, ongoing disgrace)
A cauldron with a broken leg Overturning the duke's meal His person is soiled Woe
50.4x Overturning the duke's meal: Trust (was) such a burden The young servant comes to believe he has already learned and transformed enough, so he starts to look out for things higher above, perhaps the position of royal chef. But a master chef or alchemist is never done learning the basics. Creative arts and sciences change premises and postulates too quickly. And a place of power is no place to last without changing. This servant could not help but see that broken leg, but feels compelled to serve the duke's meal anyway. The meal becomes a stain. Everything is sacrificed, the sacred is profaned. The shame comes too late and the servant had best be packing for exile. The next staff has fewer inferior traits, as if defects were burned off in some kind of crucible. It is good to rise to one's limits, even of competence. But a true transformation will upgrade the limits themselves.
356

50.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.5: wrapping melons in willows, display of restraint)
A cauldron with golden ears And metal grip Rewarding to persist
50.5x A cauldron (with) golden ears: In balance in order to effect realities The cauldron is pleasing and functional, sturdy enough to stand up to the average fool's abuse, yet well enough made to serve at the finest occasions. It receives real food from above and below, sometimes leftover stew and sometimes ambrosia and manna. It commands respect for its utility and its appearance. So too is the life of a noble who would help his people transform. He is approachable to his people and he makes himself accessible, but he keeps enough dignified distance to maintain a useful respect. The design here is almost complete. Well-balanced will mean bottom heavy, weighted a little towards practical function. The metal grip will mean that this must be handled with gloves, but also that it can lift a substantial meal. Someone is sure to make gloves another step in the ceremony, instead of wrapping the handle.
50.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao 32.6: continuously stimulated, unfortunate)
A cauldron with a jade grip Very promising Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
50.6x A jade grip across the top: The firm (and) the flexible (are) in due proportion The cauldron has a carrying ring fashioned from a fine piece of jade. Sensibility and sensitivity find common ground in a stylish understatement. A pleasant and useful presence will combine the best of both worlds. This cauldron will not be abused or ignored, or carried by random people to random places, or hung up on rusty nails. Respect can be a part of design. It's the thing that will make people say: They don't make them like they used to. It's the classical, timeless elements that will set it above all the fashions and trends, those things which are not made to last. So too with the sage and his teachings: he may lean more than a little towards the things we have handed down, and less towards the latest trends that have the new age so excited. He still wants the new, it's still about changes, but he wants to use finer ingredients.
357

50, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 03, Zhun, Rallying qian gua (inverse): 49, Ge, Seasonal Change jiao gua (reverse): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members hu gua (nuclear): 43, Guai, Decisiveness shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family 50, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Hod in Atziluth * Tarot: Eight of Wands (Directed change) * Astrology: Mercury in Fire 50, Quotations * Abjure the why and seek the how. --The Kasidah, tr R. F. Burton * The most valuable insights are methods. --Nietzsche * In this book it is spoken of the Sephiroth, and the paths, of spirits and conjurations, and many other things which may or may not exist. It is immaterial whether they exist or not. By doing certain things, certain things follow; students are most earnestly warned against attributing objective reality or philosophical validity to any of them. --Crowley, Magick in Theory and Practice * All perception of truth is a perception of an analogy; we reason from our hands to our heads. --Thoreau * You are an alchemist; make gold of that. --Pope * Say nothing, froth not, do not raise the lid of the cauldron; Simmer well, and be patient, for I am cooking you. --Rumi * I hold that man is in the right who is most closely in league with the future. --Henrik Ibsen
358

GUA 51, ZHEN4, AROUSAL
Binary 100 100 = 36; Zhen below, Zhen above; Chong Gua
51.X, Overall Image Resounding thunder Arousal The noble young one makes use of fear and alarm
to adjust and examine
Thunder reverberates through the dark clouds above. Those bound to reflex actions are moved to much motion by fear. Those who live to learn come to turn fear into courage and grace, and to sort what reacts from what drives. Wise ones might show reverence in power's face, yet sneak up behind it with a bridle in hand. Fear is just information when it's not allowed to lead. Thunder's first peal surprises, but novelty turns into experience. How can a response be worthy of such a stimulus? When the quality of our echoes inform us of our substance. We learn in time that the things which collapse have had their life, and the things which move, move into their places.
51.0, Arousal Fulfillment Shock brings fear and alarm And mirthful words and echoing laughter The thunder startles for a hundred li * around But do not let drop the ladle of sacred wine
Lizards and tigers alike react to the powerful shocks. But the master of the temple learns to hear laughter in the storm and affirmation in its thunder. Whatever might perish has already had its day, and that which has yet to settle is rattled into place. He learns to look for what thrives here as stable, attuned and ready. Remembering once having cowered, and how little value this had, today his composure is gained, not lost to the shock. It's as though the storm were calling out for heroes or hunters or warriors. The shock simply washes through him since he has learned to be ready. Of course he now knows that the thunder follows the flash. The mature one steps up like an echo, not missing the rhythm, having already owned the experience and made its energy into his own. The grace and style of the self-possessed is a benefit of the experience. In the ready state of mind, novelty washes through us, leaving us better adjusted. The master is alert, not excited; primed, not anxious. He is not disengaged or neutral. He has one moment, between the stimulus and his response, to make his choice and convert one kind of arousal into another. He'll even hear with authority.
359

51.M, Key Words Stimulus & response, action & reaction, motive & motion; reaction into response Shake up, provocation; suddenness, surge, raw energy, net motive force, arousal The unexpected, novelty, surprise, startle reflex; repercussion, resounding, retort Awakening, quickening, exhilaration, invigoration, challenge, motivation, starting Mastery, maturity, experience, getting one's grip, composure, attunement, aplomb Nimbleness, resilience; hunting, capturing & using ambient energy; taking charge
51.G, From the Glossary zhen4 (a, the) shock, thunder, shakeup, excitement, arousal, stimulation, force, power, energy, vibration, movement, motion, quake, terror, awe, unexpected; (to) shake (up), excite, stimulate, quicken, rouse, arouse, motivate, move, marshal; inspire, frighten, shock, startle, scare, alarm; tremble, vibrate, lift, quiver, dust off (s, ed, ing); (to be) shaken, shook up, excited, roused, aroused, stimulated, moved, motivated, frightened, startled, scared, alarmed; awe inspiring
51.T, Tuan Zhuan Arousal (means) fulfillment Shock brings fear (and) alarm:
The fear leads to well-being Mirthful words (and) echoing laughter:
After there is a precedent The thunder startles (for) a hundred li (around):
Disturbing the distant and frightening the near Do not let drop the ladle of sacred wine:
Emerge fit to guard the ancestral shrine, the altars to place (and) to grain (And) thereby perform the offerings (with) mastery
360

51.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
(Fan Yao 16.1: proclaiming readiness, disappointing)
The shock brings fear and alarm And later, mirthful words and echoing laughter Promising
51.1x The shock brings fear (and) alarm: The fear leads to well-being * Mirthful words (and) echoing laughter: After there is a precedent A reflex reaction, and then an elective response. With the first shock he runs to the doorway, too close to a mindless fear. This fails to do any good. After the second he grins and begins to make jokes about his haste. The world did not end: things only settled a little. We discover ourselves in reactions, and some of us learn from these. We're wired to be awakened by the novel and unfamiliar, and we're often just put to sleep by what is known. But isn't it odd how apprehension to some means anxiety, and to others means getting a grip or grasp? Awe to some is awful, and yet to others it's a high form of reverence. The latter perhaps know change as something needed, stimulation to keep life and knowledge fresh, something to jolt us awake, shock us out of our slumber and daydreams. The learning here will favor one who is ready.
51.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.2: one-eyed can see, rewarding recluse's resolve)
The shock comes with adversity A hundred thousand times one loses possessions And scrambles up the nine hills To not give chase Means seven days to gain
51.2x The shock comes with adversity: Rely upon firmness A stimulus as potent as this will offer him great knowledge, of and about his values. He might be left with no choice but to leave his belongings behind him and climb up the nine hills to safety. His alarm may be true or false, but his motion, with what ever he chooses to carry out, is real. What he is in truth, that developing flame within, will be destroyed only once in each lifetime. But what he thinks he might be, by equating himself with all those beliefs and belongings, could be tested, abused and destroyed one hundred thousand times. Driven into the hills, he tries to rise above it all, up and out of harm's way, and look philosophically down. Things that he truly needs will be restored within seven days, simply because he cannot live without them, while the things not replaced are not needed. This tests not his worth but his worth's worth.
361

51.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.3: abundant banners, noon stardust, break right arm)
The shock awakens and revives Be excited to movement instead of distress
51.3x The shock awakens (and) revives: The position (was) not appropriate Shock comes and it leaves him distraught and confounded. Perhaps he thinks that the sky shouts at him in some unknowable tongue, with some kind of rage or fury. Thunder does not care about him. What he may do in response is a choice, which gives human meaning to thunder. Indulgence in his fear will leave him numb and exposed, like a bug waking up in the cold, without wit or useful reaction. A bolder stance will find ways to steal the thunder, to put it to a better use and to turn the fear into courage and strength. This thunder can be a great wake up call, exhilarating and quickening. We might allow the thunder to take us, but forward instead of aback. We allow it to drive us, but we still do the guiding. We can let it shake out our worst and bring out our best. But first we must maintain our center of balance and gravity.
51.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.4: walking in the middle, all alone in return)
The shock is followed by muddledness
51.4x The shock (is) followed by muddledness: Less than exemplary Sinking deeper into shock, not even thunder excites him to movement. This was all too much to take charge from. Now would he plant himself in the wet earth, like a tuber, and bear only fungus for fruit, rather than keep his sense alive and respond to more wild reality. Now he insulates himself and tries to dull his senses, that all nasty shock might be muted. But this is more taxing and deadly than facing raw power and staying awake for more. To enter a state of shock in response to a wound can kill where the injury fails. When one's will to go on living is tied to one's fortune in life, it will be dragged all over the place. Power should be hunted or stolen instead. Even a misfortune can be considered fair game. Great stimulus wants a more worthy response than a lost will to live. A stunned acceptance is not a great way to accept.
362

51.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.5: trusting in excellence, promising)
The shock whether going or coming is trouble The intentions* will not be lost where there is work to be done
51.5x The shock (whether) going (or) coming (is) trouble: Exposure (in) action * (Where) one's work to be done lies in the middle Completely without loss Shock comes bringing lots of excitement, and plenty of power to move anywhere, right, left, or wrong. One may choose and embrace the pro or the con and thus gain fully half of the power at hand, but only to face its equal when equations resolve into zero. Take a look at the one who walks the high wire: he does his business by going straight forward, calmly in concentration, along his narrow, middle path. His right and left are equally wrong and inferior as choices, but they are also equally useful in keeping his balance. All movement helps him go forward. Right and left, in such cases, can be said to belong to a lesser dimension, a greater one being success in life and continuing to go forward. The forces and the movements not central to the work can still be taken and turned, thought of as vectors, or made to serve higher purpose.
51.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua* 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao* 21.6: wearing the cangue, hiding ears, unfortunate)
The shock startles and confuses Searching in wild-eyed panic To go boldly is ominous The shock is not in one's being Merely in one's neighborhood Make no mistakes Even the marital suitor* might have something to say
51.6x The shock startles (and) confuses: The balance is not yet achieved * Even though ominous, make no mistakes: Pay heed to the neighboring warnings Explosive shock brings ruin all the way up to his doorstep. This is about as close up as vicarious ever gets. His neighbors are in big trouble but cannot seem to respond in appropriate ways. Yet it isn't a failure of sympathy to refuse to go out for his own fair share of misfortune. He cannot be of much use to his neighbors if first he fails to save himself. It may be with the warmest intentions that he casts his cold gaze on their wild-eyed panic and judges their terror for things not to do. It might leave him able to help when he can. Now the neighbors are object lessons, materials for study. Heeding their words of warning can be as effective as having this shocking thing happen directly to him. Any small part of the greater event, even the poor, confused victim, might hold some useful intelligence, or first-rate second-hand information.
363

51, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 57, Xun, Adaptation qian gua (inverse): 52, Gen, Stillness jiao gua (reverse): 51, Zhen, Arousal (chong gua 4) hu gua (nuclear): 39, Jian, Impasse shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
51, Notes * 51.0 Li is a unit of distance, about 1/3 mile or 500 meters. Laozi's "journey of a thousand miles" is really 500 kilometers. It still begins with the first step, though. * 51.5 See Source Text Discrepancies and Emendations, below the Matrix section. The alternative yi4 would refer back to line 51.2 and would be translated as: "(The) hundred thousand will not be lost (where) there is work to be done." Or else: "(The) hundred thousand is not a loss (where) there is work to be done." * 51.6 The poor marital suitor, with elaborate costume and one-track mind, figures several times as a Clown or Fool figure in the Zhou Yi . In his simple-minded innocence he is often the blank screen upon which the fantasies of others are projected. This Gua is about what Carlos Castaneda calls "being a hunter of power." The Zhi Gua, 21, Biting Through, suggests objectivity, or not taking the thunder personally. The Fan Yao 21.6 warns against the perils of ignorance, the consequence of ignoring information, which might here be found even in the least likely place. Take the free opportunity, apprender en cabeza ajena, to learn in another's head.
51, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Atziluth of Atziluth * Tarot: King of Wands * Astrology: Aries Ascending, Mutable Fire
51, Quotations * Which of us listens to the hymn of a brook when the tempest speaks? --Kahlil Gibran * Yet I know that I dwell in the midst of the roar / of the Cosmic Wheel / In the hot collision of Forces, and the clangor / of Boundless Strife / Mid the sound of the speed of worlds, the rushing / worlds, and the peal / Of the thunder of Life. --William Watson, "Dawn on the Headland" * I want to have goblins about me, for I am courageous. The courage which scareth away ghosts createth goblins for itself - it wanteth to laugh. I no longer feel in common with you; the very cloud which I see beneath me, the blackness and heaviness at which I laugh - that is your thundercloud. Not by wrath, but by laughter do we slay. Come, let us slay the spirit of gravity! I learned to walk; since then have I let myself run. I learned to fly; since then I do not need pushing in order to move from a spot. --Nietzsche, TSZ #7 * It's not the thing you fear ­ it's the mother of the thing you fear. --Mary Oliver * Adversity in immunological doses has its uses; more than that crushes. --John Updike
364

GUA 52, GEN4, STILLNESS
Binary 001 001 = 09; Gen below, Gen above; Chong Gua
52.X, Overall Image Adjacent mountains Stillness The noble young one, accordingly,
contemplates nothing outside of its place
The real is contained within the obvious and apparent. Appearance is but an overlay to the real. Quietly awaiting the hand and skill of a master to strip away the ordinary, the lump of clay, the virgin block and the stone already contain the masterpiece. The sage, like the potter and sculptor, attends only the matter at hand, appreciating what it is and letting it stand forth. The mountain range is like a spine. The pivotal points do not move. The mountains at rest host their forests, valleys and streams. The axles, axes and hubs do not move, but are central to the functioning of the things revolving around them. The young noble seeks his center. and what is implicit in having one.
52.0, Stilling one's spine Not grasping one's own being Moving through one's courtyard But not seeing other people No blame
When the time has come to recapture the center of being, the peripheral life must wait, the family and the society too. He straightens himself in his calm, stacking the bones of his spine in a balance, training his gaze on the backs of his eyelids, staking his thoughts to his place in the moment. He puts himself into his proper place and position. The lump, the block, the stone he appears to be already contains the best he can be, if he can strip away the extraneous and unlearn those things which do not belong and find the best shape for the rest. He seems to be lost in his thoughts, but a loss of one's center is the real meaning of lost. From the middle of his implicitness, and all of its implications, he delivers the one he can be from illusion and what he cannot from thought. He cannot define himself in this way. The boundaries which define him will be found in his interactions. The self-absorbed space is a place to be outgrown. He cannot figure out where he is without referring to his context. Finding the center is merely the optimum place to begin, or to begin all over again. Progress is not the point yet. This is taking a moment to learn if he's even on the right path.
365

52.M, Key Words Check, restrain, resist, confine, delimit, define, discipline; to hold against change Straightforward, forthright, honest, present, steadfast, anchored, rooted, grounded Concentration, introspection, reflection, meditation, quietude, self-containment Prepossession, reserve, balance, stability, equilibrium, poise; the matter at hand Touchstone, paragon, terminus; silence, resting, inertness; presence, self mastery Pressures building to not be still; self-examination; backbone, integrity, principle
52.G, From the Glossary gen4 (to) still, check, limit, restrain, constrain, prevent, confine, arrest, define, resist, be obstinate; keep still, just be, hold steady, balance, rest, set, settle, quiet, suspend (s, ed, ing); (a, the) restraint, confinement, definition, boundary, setting, obstacle ahead, stillness, equilibrium, rest, [inertia]; stiffness; opposition, hostility; (to be) outspoken, straightforward, candid, blunt, simple, honest; refractory, stubborn, obstinate, perverse
52.T, Tuan Zhuan Stillness
(Means) to keep still (If) time to stop, then stop
(If) time to move, then move (When) activity (and) rest do not lose their timing One's path (is) revealed (and) clarified Stillness (means) self-restraint Restraint (is) to one's own purpose Above (and) below resist corresponding Having nothing to do with each other And so it is that having no grasp of one's own being (And) moving (through) one's courtyard Without seeing other people (Is) without blame
366

52.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.1: adorning the feet, dismissing carriage, walking)
Stilling those toes Making no mistakes Warranting prolonged persistence
52.1x Stilling those toes: Before losing the principle He plants his toes like pudgy, little pink roots, and tries to hold some ground here, deciding upon inaction as a cure for wrong action, not-doing a cure for wrongdoing. He gets a good start at stopping by slowing himself to a crawl. Although he seems to be going too far in going nowhere at all, at least now he might pay more attention. Nothing ever really stops moving and changing, not even ancient and sacred stones. Stillness and equilibrium are states that we find in our minds, when we cease to be out of phase or at war with our thoughts and the world. But this sort of stillness can still move quite quickly, balance can swing back and forth and still be balance, and equilibrium is more often than not a dynamic. What he now has is more like a rest, the point of which is finding the proper beginning. But the end is still far from here.
52.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.2: correcting mother's fixations, hard to persist)
Stilling those legs Not helpful in one's pursuits One's heart is not gratified
52.2x Not helpful in one's pursuits: Not ready to back off (and) listen Bringing his legs to a halt, stopping to look around, he's learned, to his amazement, that he treads an inferior path. His heart does not want him to make this discovery. Now there is turning around to be done, explaining himself, excusing himself, and figuring out where to go and what to do next. Indeed, this does not help him at all to maintain his old pursuits, though he still has some old inertia to spend. The paths or people he had chosen to follow are too set or full of their own directions to turn back and question themselves. He could remain swept along, as if by peer suction, feigning some sort of innocence, and leaving that nagging, old conscience behind. But innocence would soon become ignorance and the conscience an unsettled mind. It is only his lack of stillness now that makes his right and true path more distant.
367

52.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.3: curtailing itself is not a mistake)
Setting those restrictions Divided at one's waist Rigors choke the heart
52.3x Setting those restrictions: Crises choke the heart He divides his being between high and low and will not touch the inferior parts. As a matter of having a course to our lives, we need to find and set limits, curtail and train our natures to keep ourselves out of trouble. But to violate these natures, to be stiff and rigid instead of just still, to pile on foreign and alien virtues and deny ourselves a more natural course is merely another form of perversion. We have turned against ourselves. This is as unwholesome as sin. A celibate gets himself bent out of shape in the loins, pinches a nerve, cavorts with the succubus in the early hours of dawn, and awakens to find his own clawmarks and blood on his breast. His own hands try to set his heart free. Denial of life is bad management, deeply unkind to oneself, not a path to wisdom. Resistance generates heat, resentment smolders in thwarted desire.
52.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
Fan Yao 56.4: wanderer in shelter, money and axe but no peace
Stilling one's being Not a mistake
52.4x Stilling one's being: Stilling all of the personal He comes to terms with his limits and tries to stay calm about finitude. In stillness he watches his impulses rising and falling, his thoughts as they come and go, his feelings waxing and waning. At rest in the breath, in heart and mind, there is neither self nor an other, except as little junctions where powers knot up for a while, where original being pretends to be us. There are landmarks to locate, and touchstones to touch here. It's not like there's nothing to do. Life forms form attitudes here at the center, and these can turn the whole world upside down. Even scientists see what they want to see: the still ones can watch what they want, and make better theories. Our part in the process of living starts here at the place we begin. Of course, this is not the end, meditation isn't a goal. What we learn in stillness is where to go next.
368

52.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.5: geese to high ground, only three years, promising)
Stilling those jawbones Words will have order Regrets pass
52.5x Stilling those jawbones: Applying the central principle He practices ruling his speech now, and pays some overdue homage to listening and silence. There are no limits to things which might be spoken about and thought of, but this does not seem to discourage those who would fill up all silence. All of the branches a tree could grow would certainly be its demise, so the tree needs to limit itself to what makes fruit and seed. So too with proper speech: there is room around one's few, but meaningful words here for the verbal equivalent of breezes and light. There is also some room to ponder one's thoughts, and remove the unwanted sharp edges. Once words get out they circulate many times over: the right words will keep working their magic and the wrong ones will keep causing damage. Outspoken, but not unthinking, is good, but the world around us wants idle gossip and small talk.
52.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity
(Fan Yao 15.6: expressing modesty, deploying reserves at home)
Authentic stillness Promising
52.6x Authentic stillness holds promise: The way to a genuine outcome He takes his humble silence and stillness to the highest place he can find. Up on top of the mountain, he can order the clouds to go where they will, command the stars to follow their courses. We have great authority up on the summit, as lords of our own states of mind. The view is so great up here that less modest folks get embarrassed approaching the foothills. The closer we can position ourselves to an axis, the less unchosen motion we'll need to endure. This need not mean being detached or aloof. When we want our fullest command, this is where to begin, at the helm of our own attitudes. We do not need to spend all our lives in self-examination, or introspect our friends away, but when we would live in the actual world and know just what we are capable of, we revisit this axis and learn. Wanting this world, as it is, makes it ours.
369

52, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 58, Dui, Satisfaction qian gua (inverse): 51, Zhen, Arousal jiao gua (reverse): 52, Gen, Stillness (chong gua 1) hu gua (nuclear): 40, Jie, Release shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
52, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Assiah of Assiah * Tarot: Princess of Pentacles * Astrology: Caput Draconis in Earth
52, Quotations * How beautiful it is to do nothing, and then rest afterward. --Spanish proverb * This quietness The shrilling of cicadas Stabs into the rocks. --Basho * First there is no mountain then there is no mountain then there is. --Zen lore, adapted by Donovan * And believe me, friend Hullaballoo! The greatest events are not our noisiest but our stillest hours. Not around the inventors of new noise, but around the inventors of new values doth the world revolve; inaudibly it revolveth. --Nietzsche, TSZ #40 * Nothing is often a good thing to say, and always a clever thing to say. --Will Durant * Besides the noble art of getting things done, there is the noble art of leaving things undone. The wisdom of life consists in the elimination of nonessentials. --Lin Yutang * All human evil comes from a single cause, man's inability to sit still in a room. --Blaise Pascal
370

GUA 53, JIAN4, GRADUAL PROGRESS
Binary 001 011 = 11; Gen below, Xun above
53.X, Overall Image On top of the mountain there is a tree Gradual progress The noble young one, accordingly,
abides in excellence and character to raise the social norms
In strong and steady winds the tree up on the mountain grows slowly, keeping still and adapting to its place. By imperceptible steps, the young sprout fashions itself into a wizened and gnarly old tree, well developed and firmly rooted. Haste in this climate will not grow strong roots; one would battle the winds and lose. Landmarks do not fly. Adapting to the forms it is given to live with, like paths of least resistance, the little green root takes years, but it finally splits the boulder in two and makes it an anchor. It becomes an inspiration. Others won't grow by pulling their branches, so the sage considers the use of example and cultivates consistency in his character.
53.0, Gradual Progress The young woman's engagement is promising Worth the persistence
Following years of engagement, the maiden is ready at last to call the young man her husband and make an even longer commitment. After growing steadily closer, strictly according to the ways of their kind, the wild geese mate for life, and their family begins with a pair. Their signals are clear and flight is in order. In due time, with patience, formalities and necessities, the good nest is made and young goslings begin to arrive. Tradition, custom and time-tested methods lay down the protocols, all the little details, and lots and more lots of givens. Few geese can simply wing it. Progress follows the pace of approved success, not many move at their own pace. Patience makes progress that lasts and builds on itself, one day's growth at a time, and one year's growth every year. Keeping still and penetrating makes the surest progress. Needs are carefully mated to the situations at hand. As sunlight, wind, water and earth slowly take form in a living, intelligent wood, the small things are added, tested, adjusted and built upon. Like migratory plans, personal expressions are little more than variations on a theme. Cultures also remember average success.
371

53.M, Key Words Advancing by degrees, steadiness of pace, thoroughness, reliability, consistency Constancy, tenacity, endurance; procedures to follow, proceedings, conventions Incremental growth, maturation, development; a longer process, one day at a time Accommodation, patience, meeting criteria of place, due process, rites, protocol Wild goose as symbol for long-term fidelity and commitment; following the order Practicality, day to day progress, slowly and surely, a progressive conservatism
53.G, From the Glossary jian4 (to) advance gradually, increasingly, advance by degrees, go little by little, go bit by bit, go steadily, make gradual progress, make steady progress, pace oneself, progress gradually, develop into; seep into, soak, saturate (s, ed, ing); (a, the) proceedings, formalities, details, protocol, patient progress, (gradual, steady) advance, progress; (to be) next, slight; gradually, increasingly
53.T, Tuan Zhuan Gradual progress leads to advance
The young woman's engagement (is) timely Advancing secures a position
Making progress will be an accomplishment Advancing according to principle
(Is) a fitting way to do right by the realm In such a position
The firm secures the center To be still and also adapt
(Is) movement without exhaustion
372

53.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.1: boundaries maintain the family, regrets pass)
The wild geese advance by degrees to the shoreline The little fledgling* is struggling There will be criticism But not blame
53.1x The little fledgling is having difficulties: Deserving no blame The wild geese cross the great water, returning from their migration, bringing their latest fledgling. They approach with the same formation, the same steady bearing and wingbeats they began their journey with. But now they need to rest their wings in a place their youngster has not seen before. The young one is weak, and in an odd place, and he's struggling to stay in formation. Strange noises assail him, echoing in the cliffs, the other birds, giving odd and discomforting glances, squawk doubtfully. It is known that a predator waits, since not all of the fledglings survive, or can prove their worth and grow old, but this youngster has never seen one. As small as he is, he would make a pretty good meal. Education will be a long and serious business, and it begins with the language and signals. Constructive critique might save his life.
53.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.2: subtleties under the bed, scribes and diviners)
The wild geese advance by degrees to the cliffs Drinking and eating and honking and honking* Auspicious
53.2x Drinking (and) eating (and) honking (and) honking: Not merely filling up After circling for half of the morning and getting the lay of this land, the wild geese find a good place to rest. Even the old predator is full and enjoying a nap. Although there is enough food to gorge themselves and be gone, proper geese won't do this. Flapping their wings and calling with great celebration, they'll summon all of the geese who inhabit this land to come as a flock to the feast. Now the whole gaggle's here for the day, dining and drinking in peace and good cheer. With a whole lot of jovial honking, they make their arrival both known and welcome. Getting familiar with the territory, and bonding with the neighbors, will serve them longer than their much needed meals and rest. Had they entered this new land as sneaks, suspicions would have haunted them all day and night. This way they will soon have fit in here.
373

53.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.3: observing our own lives in advances and retreats)
The wild goose advances by degrees across the highlands The husband, on expedition, never returns The wife conceives but cannot raise her young Brutal Worthwhile to guard against predators
53.3x The husband presses on instead of returning: Abandoning flock (and) kindred * The wife conceives but (can)not raise (her) young: Losing her own way * Worthwhile (and) productive to guard against predators: Responding (by) protecting each other He flies to the rugged plateau and beyond, seeking out greater purpose and drama. On vigorous wings, thinking of heaven, our gander gets lost somewhere above the high desert, where even few trees can survive. Alas, he is not smart enough to live like a raven. Being headstrong is not this bird's strength. This is a better home for wild ideas. Meanwhile, his mate leaves the nest to forage for food and the predator snatches the cold eggs and goslings. This is why most of the geese who will carry their bloodline forward carry the trait of fidelity and continue their old proven ways. When our higher purpose involves continuing life, we'll subordinate our other plans and care for these priorities in something like proper order. These wild, bird-brained schemes, the barren and fruitless impulses, only miscarry successful continuance.
53.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.4: noble's elective retreat, common people deny)
The wild goose advances by degrees to the trees Perchance to find that flat branch No harm done
53.4x Perchance to find that flat branch: Accepting in order to adapt Making still greater headway, the wild goose wings onward towards the great tree high on the mountain. What a fine and exalted place to rest! Imagine a goose with a view fit for eagles! But of course his ambitions are tempered, he knows he is not a raptor. There is no harm in trying, no blame if he stumbles, if he has his fallback position, his fallback plan being his nod to conservative thinking. Perching in trees is no easy thing when all you can grip with is floppy, webbed feet, even without the strong winds here. These gnarly, old trees will seldom grow flat or regular branches. He circles around in search of a perch, perchance to find that branch that does not belong here as he doesn't either. And if he cannot find his purchase up high here he can still always waddle around on the hill. Not very right is not always wrong.
374

53.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness
(Fan Yao 52.5: stilling those jawbones, words will have order)
The wild geese advance by degrees to higher ground The wife is three years without conceiving In the end nothing overcomes her Promising
53.5x In the end, nothing overcomes her good fortune: Securing a home for hope Our gander has waited a third of his life to find this young goose by his side. His routine was just impressive enough and her honking had just the right tone. They can finally un-steady their flight and do their great aerial dance. Goose and gander consummate and play for a day or two. But then they move back to those practical matters, social adjustments and seasonal cycles, the plans to cross the great waters and designs for just the right nest. Aging seems to take ages, but the time, when it's allowed to keep going, will eventually come around. Problems which earlier had no solution, when all of the pieces just were not there yet, seem to resolve themselves. Those delays were not setbacks here, there were just a lot of steps to take forward. The unconceived and unhatched dreams now have a world to live and grow up in.
53.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
(Fan Yao 39.6: if going impassable, coming back is maturity)
The wild geese advance by degrees across the highlands Their feathers are worthy to use in performing the sacred dance Auspicious
53.6x (That) their feathers (are) worthy to use (In) performing the sacred dance (is) promising:
Not likely to be distracted The formation of geese in the sky has grown gradually smaller and smaller, as they slowly ascend beyond the cloud heights and over the far horizon. The steady pace has lasted, and persistence has furthered them vastly. Before they were just a flock of birds, but now they have gone beyond, become one with that grandest mystery. Even the goose gets to heaven.* The humans stuck on the ground, watching these geese going south, are not to be disconcerted. The feather that comes drifting down is no minor omen or charm. It has a special place in the rites, as a central prop for the sacred dance. It honors and captures the spirit of patient transcendence. None will laugh at their funny feet now: it's the humans who face the long winter. If the people can be wise, they'll be lifted up by example. Liberation is a lifetime of work.
375

53, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage qian gua (inverse): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage jiao gua (reverse): 16, Gu, Detoxifying hu gua (nuclear): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 45, 12, 17, 25 shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
53, Notes * 53.1, 2 These provide some good examples of an Old Chinese word's wonderful adaptability in and to context. The word zi means any young one, so given the wild goose as a subject, the legitimate translation is fledgling. If they were not flying, the word could also be gosling. The reiteration of kan in 53.2, perhaps a nod to the zhi gua being a chong gua, implies echoes of celebration, or a back-and-forth interchange. Again, given geese as a subject, honking is the legitimate rendering. The Chinese word used here for goose (or swan) is the onomatopoeic hong. But if these were birds of a different feather, squawking, crowing or chirping might have been legitimately used. * 53.6 See the Buddhist's Heart Sutra's line: gate gate paragate par asamgate bodhi svaha . Gone, gone, gone beyond, completely gone beyond: waking up: hooray!
53, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Yetzirah of Atziluth * Tarot: Prince of Pentacles * Astrology: Taurus Ascending, Fixed Earth
53, Quotations * "Begin at the beginning," the king said gravely, "and go on till you come to the end: then stop." --Lewis Carroll, Alice * Free, dost thou call thyself? Thy ruling thought would I hear of, and not that thou hast escaped a yoke ... . Many a one hath cast away his final worth when he cast away his servitude ... . Free from what? Free for what?" --Nietzsche, TSZ #17 * Patience, n. A minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue. --Ambrose Bierce, The Devil's Dictionary * Even after a bad harvest there must be sowing. --Seneca * One of the sources of pride in being a human is the ability to bear present frustrations in the interests of longer purposes. --Helen Merrell Lynd * We think in generalities but we live in detail. --A.N. Whitehead * In most things success depends on knowing how long it takes to succeed. --Charles Louis de Montesquieu
376

GUA 54, GUI1 MEI4, LITTLE SISTER'S MARRIAGE
Binary 110 100 = 52; Dui below, Zhen above
54.X, Overall Image Over the pond there is thunder Little sister's marriage The noble young one uses enduring ends
to understand the ephemeral
The pond is aroused by the thunder, her surface all ripples and splash, but soon the thunder is gone. This nubile, young daughter is a shimmering wave of delight, but movement comes from desire alone. Seducing superior males is the only thing on her mind. This is of no real consequence. A wise one might still enjoy some timely adventure and mischief, yet he'll consider beginnings in the light of enduring ends. He makes his choices with values, and the cure for his having too many good ideas is a higher standard of good. Haste has no depth or duration. Short sight will trade rights for privileges, liberty for security, the long-term for the short-term prosperity.
54.0, Little Sister's Marriage To go boldly has pitfalls Not a direction with merit
It might have been simple, a hundred millenia past, to leap with one's whole heart at the first opportunity, without any pretense or pretexts. Humans began in this way. Were it not for the animal passions, only plants would exist. Heaven and earth must unite to bring forth the ten thousand things. But we modern people believe that we have a lot farther to go. Now one might leap instead into webs, and nets, and other entanglements. This can even cause some folks to think about what they are doing, to consider the long-term priorities and defer their gratifications until the time ripens a little. It's bred in the bone to want and desire. It's part of a young maiden's nature to hunt and try to entrap the young noble. She chases him now, thinking nubile and noble to be a good mix, thinking charm and desire will lead him, ready to get him to jump to some early conclusions. Yet there may be more to his life than trolling this lake for nubile young maidens, and the awkwardness of the following days to regain the distance he wants. For longer vision, or more distant ends, this fling might best be begun with a clear, level talk about options. Deferring gratification isn't forever.
377

54.M, Key Words Premature engagement, compromising position, settling early for less, entrapment Jumping to conclusions, immediate gratification, haste, impulsiveness, immaturity Impatience, eagerness, quick solutions, ephemera, transience; whim, flush, rush Fascination, allurement, unenduring enthusiasm, charm, appeal, desire as a leader Passing fancy, short sight, seduction, bait; addiction meaning to give into slavery Difficulties in right mating, discrimination, subordinating offer to long term goals
54.G, From the Glossary gui1 (a, the) betrothal, engagement, homecoming, marriage, new home; return; (to) belong, (come, go, take, turn) back; bring home (around, again), come (back) home, restore, return, revert, bring to; send, go (back, home) (to); be persuaded, capitulate, give in, (give) in marriage, marry, gave ... in marriage; become loyal, change loyalties, submit, turn over to; go to new home (s, ed, ing); (to be) restored; to where ... belongs; where to turn mei4 (a, the) little sister, younger sister, maiden, virgin, girl, daughter of second wife, step sister; young sister's, little sister's
54.T, Tuan Zhuan Little sister's marriage
Heaven (and) earth have their meanings in wholeness (When) heaven (and) earth do not interact
Then the myriad beings do not come to be Little sister's marriage (is) humanity's end (and) beginning Satisfaction (as) a way to move (Is) the reason for little sister's marriage To go boldly (is) inauspicious: The dignity is not appropriate Not a direction with merit: The yielding takes advantage of the firm
378

54.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.1: no blame)
Little sister marries as second wife The lame are still able to take steps To press on is promising
54.1x Little sister marries as second wife: In order to endure * The lame can (still) take steps: Fortunate (In) supporting each other Little sister settles in a little bit early for something a little bit less, beginning at the bottom and building with modest means. With her simple roof and her simpler life and just enough wherewithal to get by, she seems content to be this far from the top. There are many who get by with less, content with substance and content. Many too, who must tramp along resigned to having one leg gone lame, no longer asked to run errands, no longer envied or challenged, perhaps to never go farther than an ordinary reality. But freedom from all these demands might set her free from the hustle, and leave her time to be just herself, enjoying her life as it is. Her daring not to be great does not prevent her becoming the best she can be. This is not so inferior after all: life is many-dimensioned. And she does not purposely cripple herself to attain this.
54.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.2: countless losses, up 9 hills, chase wastes 7 days)
The one-eyed can still see Warranting the secluded one's persistence
54.2x Warranting the secluded one's persistence: Not yet ready to vary the rules Even a one-eyed man can see right through little sister. Without the eye for depth, he still sees shallowness well and does not get excited. He's had enough bad luck and with only one eye remaining, he is in no rush to risk what remains of his vision and hopes. Now he is more than doubly wary of further risky adventures. Without his age and sound judgment he might have leapt at this, getting pulled or seducted along. Today, he still wants a partner, a new point of view and a second opinion, and he still wants the flow, just not down the drain. His next one won't be ill-considered. Such a caution will refute joy whenever it can, with or without hope of failure, until it cannot be refuted. This is just how it must be now, a caution out of proportion to prospect and not the brightest of futures. Little sister is also better off elsewhere.
379

54.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 34.3: nets, not force, goat butting hedge gets stuck)
Little sister marries as a bondmaid Then comes back to marry as second wife
54.3x Little sister marries as a bondmaid: Still not satisfactory Poor little sister spies her great chance in the person of dashing prince charming. This one has every trait that she wants in a man: he is tall, attractive and wealthy. Not once did she think to look for honest or kind, so instead she finds herself sold into slavery. She gets out of this misadventure and she bounces right back as a cool concubine. From the worst to second to worst: only for slaves is this upwards. Still she thinks she is still on her way to the top. But every year means a little more paint, more money for clothes and a trinket or two. Just a few more lessons in judgment and she might even find that simpler home she was offered so long ago. Her race to the top is with wrinkles and sags, and the only time that she has. So this one is not a pursuit she is likely to win. Why would her happiness even need such pursuing?
54.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.4: complete commitment, without mistakes)
Little sister's marriage is delayed beyond the allotted term A later marriage becomes timely
54.4x Exceeding the allotted term has its purpose There will be a delay and then progress Little sister's betrothal does not much excite her. At least this is how it may seem. If this is her only reward, maybe she needs to work on her merit some more. She postpones the day to the limits of social endurance. She burns her strange candles at midnight, and marks up the floor with circles and runes. She arranges a handful of risky encounters between her betrothed and nubile, young maidens. Her dowry becomes a bride price. Her chances to screw things up are rapidly passing her by. She could pick her nose in public. She's tried everything except saying no, which might show some wisdom. If this engagement outlives her trials, it is nothing less than pure fate. Then she can get on with her life, resigned to a well-tested destiny. Let's hope that she does not drive him insane, then accuse him of being irrational.
380

54.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
(Fan Yao 58.5: trusting in the unsustainable holds struggles)
When Lord Yi gave his maiden daughter in marriage This noble woman's gown was not equal
to her bridesmaids' gowns in fineness The moon approaching fullness Is hopeful
54.5x When Lord Yi gave (his) maiden daughter in marriage There was no equal to her bridesmaids' gowns (in) fineness * Her place was in the center, In order to honor the journey The king's maiden daughter cannot help but wed a man from a lower station in life. How easy it would be here to have the perfect wedding and to be the perfect bride, but at the insistence and with the help of her wise, old father, Lord Yi, a statement is made instead: she dresses more humbly than good taste allows, more humbly than her bridesmaids. Even if this is a moment to be remembered forever, why would she want perfection so soon in her life? The moment the moon gets full it stops waxing and shortly begins to wane. Thus to take the position of the moon less than full is to make the sun wait to see her full face. Hereby this princess has left herself room to blossom and grow throughout life. This lady will age very well: she will find her rewards in longer-term prospects and in sharing her prime with her grandchildren.
54.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.6: estranged, alone, seeing weird things in suitor)
The bride offers up a basket, with no contents The groom sacrifices a lamb, with no blood Not a direction with merit
54.6x Top six has no content Offering a basket without substance All the best forms are adhered to, and all the acceptable motions are made, but this wedding is a sham. Empty baskets, gold-painted daggers and pre-slaughtered lambs: be certain that someone is making a profit here, but it will not accrue to this couple. She walks and looks like a bride. He stands and moves like a groom. We wonder, and look for content in all of their lovely speeches and vows. Are these statements fruitless and bloodless as well? The sacred is missing here. Has the impressive cost of this farce bought any meaning at all? How long can such vain pretense continue? They do not prepare to endure. Appearance cannot be maintained without substance behind it. Yes, this is all very modern, the sacrifice civilized, not primitive or messy. But all this means is that modern must fail as well: we see this in meaningful signs.
381

54, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress qian gua (inverse): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress jiao gua (reverse): 17, Sui, Following hu gua (nuclear): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 46, 18, 11, 26 shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
54, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Atziluth of Briah * Tarot: King of Cups * Astrology: Cancer Ascending, Cardinal Water
54, Quotations * Every monster wouldst thou caress. A whiff of warm breath, a little soft tuff on its paw: - and immediately wert thou ready to love and to lure it. Love is the danger of the lonesomest one, love to anything, if it only live! Laughable, verily, is my folly and my modesty in love. --Nietzsche, TSZ #45 * It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden; Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be Ere one can say "It lightens." --Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet * People in a hurry cannot think, cannot grow, nor can they decay. They are preserved in a state of perpetual puerility. --Eric Hoffer * Though we seem grieved at the shortness of life in general, we are wishing every period of it at an end. --Joseph Addison * If the whole human race lay in one grave, the epitaph on its headstone might well be: "It seemed a good idea at the time." --Dame Rebecca West * Self-respect is the fruit of discipline; the sense of dignity grows with the ability to say no to oneself. --Abraham J. Heschel * Nine-tenths of wisdom consists in being wise in time. --Theodore Roosevelt
382

GUA 55, FENG1, ABUNDANCE
Binary 101 100 = 44; Li below, Zhen above
55.X, Overall Image Thunder and lightning, coming as one Abundance The noble young one, accordingly,
executes justice and carries out judgment
Thunder and lightning at once means a little too close: a direct hit. Thunder leaps from the flame and the heat makes immediate movement, be it in or out of control. The boom brings it all too much to life. The roads of the busy society come alive from dawn until dark. The demands of the thriving economy press in against all of the options. Many are lost amidst the complex of rites which attend the advancing culture and its economy, but the young noble can still resolve conflicts and allocate force with strict precision, by giving structure to his vision and ignoring whatever he can. He cuts though confusion with force and clarity, direction and orientation.
55.0, Abundance Fulfillment The sovereign approaches this Do not be anxious It suits the sun to be at midday
To take full advantage of prosperous times, the lightning speed of the sovereign's executive judgment is needed. Only a moment will pass between decisions and their execution. This is not a time for committees. Command cannot sit and ponder, or jabber on about ramifications. Today is the autocrat's day, either to shine or else to prove himself dull. Of course, high noon means the sun is soon to decline, just as great wealth and power today become myth and momentum tomorrow. This is no reason not to jump at this chance. To mourn the fall before the glory is to get out of place with one's timing and lose one's presence of mind. What you wished for is here right now, and of course it's a little too much. Most of the real world now might be no more than distraction, and choosing what to postpone or ignore means assessing things quickly for what they might be worth. This in its turn means clear and useful values. To not waste this day will mean sorting much of it out once it's over, when one has time to be grateful for breath, and even a little decline in one's rate of success, as relief from this storm of activity. To make the most, keep little.
383

55.M, Key Words Busyness, hustle, confusion, crowding, overcommitment; a culmination or zenith Prosperity, affluence, riches, profusion, confusion, multiple choices, complexity Information or sensory overload; immediacy, urgency; maximum, peak, climax Call for dispatch, executive decision, selection, focus, summary or snap judgment Tunnel vision of daytime stars a.k.a. polarized light; curtains, tall buildings, maze Many demands on the attention, awareness narrowly apportioned, circumscription
55.G, From the Glossary feng1 (a, the) abundance, prosperity, affluence, riches, plenty, profusion; (to be) (so) abundant, luxurious (-iant), prosperous, bountiful, prolific, ample, copious, sumptuous, ripe, plentiful, full, thick (that), filled, fulfilled; (to) abound in, prosper in, proliferate (s, ed, ing); fully
55.T, Tuan Zhuan Abundance
(Means) greatness Intelligence (is) behind movement
Given this, abundance The sovereign approaches this:
Appreciate the greatness Do not be anxious, (it) suits the sun (to be at) midday:
Appropriate for illuminating all under heaven The sun (at) midday, in due order, goes down
The moon (at) full, in due order, (is) consumed (If) heaven (and) earth fill up (and) empty out In accord with the time (in both) waning (and) waxing Then how much more true for humanity! (And) how much more true for the ghosts and the spirits!
384

55.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess
(Fan Yao 62.1: a flying bird on the way to misfortune)
Meeting one's match or superior Even for a long week,* no harm is done To continue has merit
55.1x Even for a long week, no error: To exceed the long week (means) disaster During the fast moving times, in the times of the greatest abundance, with urgencies everywhere, even a mere ten moments are precious in value. The prince wants his facts with their edges still sharp, his truths rough hewn and provisional, unpolished by winds of time. His people are on their feet and thinking, not down on their knees mouthing platitudes. Yet, in the midst of all of this, whatever demands there may be, when you meet a mate or a colleague, a mentor or partner to be, the priorities shift over here and leaves of absence are granted. You might miss one of each sacrifice,* but you fill voids where helpers should be, consolidate forces, gain recognition and learn some new tricks. You can't rejoice thus forever, and outside the world keeps moving, but few are so important that the spirits can't go for ten days without them.
55.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
(Fan Yao 34.2: persistence is promising)
So abundant are their partition screens At midday one may see the bushel constellation* Going ahead brings suspicion and anxiety To be true and express this Is timely
55.2x Be true (and) express this: Credibility helps to manifest the purpose In prosperous times, tall walls are built, plush curtains hung, bright banners play in the breezes above. To some it's as good as it gets. But all this distraction acts like a maze, the amazements are limits to vision: these amazing distractions do limiting things to the views. Things cast so many shadows that the midday sun is not seen. Life is so circumscribed, between the sky-high piles of work to be done, that up and down, or shortcuts through the curtains, are the only directions some can still take. These are not liked or trusted. Yet one must climb for broader views, or stay below chasing cheese. Smart ones run the maze well and wise ones know how to leave if they must. Common to both is working above suspicion. The others return to their business, unable to pay much attention. Trust is like having a high-level clearance.
385

55.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.3: shock awakens, to movement, not distress)
So abundant are their flowing banners At midday one may see stardust And break one's right arm Make no mistakes
55.3x (So) abundant (are) their flowing banners: Ill-suited to important concerns * Breaking one's right arm: In the end unfit for use What once were empty spaces are now filled with life and its houses. The canopy of progress, and its undergrowth of hustle, casts such a shadow that little above can be seen now. Bright banners cover most of what's left of the sky. We wished for this much to do and all these paths to choose from, but only have time for so much and still cannot tread more than one path at a time. An abundance of busyness forces the polarized view. There is something left of the stars above but to stare at these to light the way out means taking your eyes off the treacherous ground. Too much is afoot: not much will be carried out. The right arm at risk is not the spare, but the main one. The lights are useless as lanterns, and not much better as guides. The blind will learn to hear. If you still know which way is up, you will only need one more direction.
55.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua* 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao* 36.4: enter left side, steal dark heart's intentions)
So abundant are their screens At midday one may see the bushel constellation Or find their hidden leader* Opportune
55.4x (So) abundant (are) their screens: The position is not appropriate * (At) midday (one may) see the bushel constellation: The gloom has no vision * Finding their hidden leader: (An) opportunity (for) action He used to know this place, before things grew so busy. He has spent enough time here and above to have an old mental map, both a north and an up, and a sense of the lay of a simpler land. Some of this information can still be carried out in the dark, or in the darkening cloak of activity. Good pupils will adjust to available light. This lets him make use of the pall, darkness now thrust upon him, transforming the confusing experience into more useful intelligence. He keeps to the shadows awhile, looking behind all the curtains and scenes, learning of the forces at work in the background, while under a cover of darkness, possessing what makes the maze useful, using even ignorance to best advantage. The dark, secret places are found. Now they shelter and guard young plans and designs, and a newer map is drawn of a brighter tomorrow.
386

55.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.5: mature one's tiger transformation, be sure)
The pattern emerges Bringing reward and commendation Promising
55.5x Six fifth holds promise: (Of) bringing rewards Great change is at hand. Who is who or what is what, or even what needs to be done, resolves itself out of the fuzz like the stripes on a growing tiger. What was chaos in gold and black becomes stark relief. The new king asks clear, candid questions, and invites specific talents to court, and demands only relevant answers. And those fools around the old throne will get rid of the mush in their mouths or will be replaced by more competent men. A real command starts to delegate. Genius is task specific and its strength is the solving of problems. Retained for more general use, it only grows fat and lazy. When a change is resolved in the mind and clear resolutions are made, the sovereign's new focus is more than a match for confusion. The unclear part of the shaman's journey is over, mind is now unstuck. Now he assembles his insights.
55.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
(Fan Yao 30.6: emergencies to expedite, executions & mercy)
So rich are their dwellings Screening away their own families Peering through their doorways Desolate in their want of others Three years not seen face to face Unfortunate
55.6x (So) rich (are) their dwellings: (Having) soared to heaven's threshold * Peering through their doorways Desolate in their want of others: A consequence of concealment Prosperity's point was to get him up here and aloof, shed of the coarseness below. He was told he would mingle with angels. Attaining his dream of abundance, he has finally built his big, secure house way up high on the hill, with the tall wall around it, to screen himself off with his family from suspected thieves, such as time. His food and his fuel have to sneak in through the back door. He needs keys to get out and shoes to come in. At first it seems he truly might be in heaven, or hovering nearby. But three years alone start to alter his thinking. He watches his gate and notes that it never opens. No friends intrude, no angels, not even beggars or bandits. This is high's down side: three years of mourning, missing the clamor and din, lost social savvy and skills, the laughter of children. Today he considers inviting some thieves.
387

55, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 59, Huan, Scattering qian gua (inverse): 56, Lu, The Wanderer jiao gua (reverse): 21, Shi He, Biting Through hu gua (nuclear): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
55, Notes * 55.1 Xun2 was an ancient ten day week, with a cycle of specific sacrifical rituals. Ten days away would miss only one of each. The Chinese text does not read shi ri, ten days, which would suggest different symbolic connotations of the number ten. * 55.2 There is much speculation that references to darkness and stars at midday refer to a midday solar eclipse in the Early Zhou. I can neither find evidence for this in the Zhouyi text itself, nor rule it out as an hypothesis. This interpretation refers instead to a purported phenomenon which can also occur with an eclipse: with vision from deep inside of a tunnel or well, reflected and ambient light is absorbed and only the direct or polarized rays are admitted. Without ambient glare even the stars might be seen. The big price to pay for abundance is the nuisance of extreme distraction. Both sharp focus and executive decision making, imagined or referred to here as tunnel vision, are needed to achieve anything of value in this maze. But one may take advantage of the amazement and distractedness of others. * 55.4 Working in darkness refers to Zhi Gua 36, Brightness Obscured, and to the covert operations discussed at Fan Yao 36.4. To remain focused turns a dark situation into an enlightened covert intelligence.
55, Wai Guang * Qabalah: He; Path between Tipareth and Geburah (Trad: Tp-Cm) * Tarot : The Emperor (Executive dispatch) * Astrology: First House, Cardinal Fire, Aries
55, Quotations * We are mistaken in believing that the mind and judgment are two separate things; judgment is only the extent of the mind's illumination. --La Rochefoucauld * Give your decisions, never your reasons, your decisions may be right, your reasons are sure to be wrong. --Lord Mansfield * "Fellow suffering! Fellow suffering with the higher men!" he cried out, and his countenance changed to brass. "Well that hath had its time! My suffering and my fellow suffering - what matter about them! ... . This is my morning, my day beginneth" ... . Thus spake Zarathustra and left his cave, glowing and strong, like a morning sun coming out of gloomy mountains." --Nietzsche, TSZ #80 * Guess if you can, choose if you dare. --Corneille * For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required. --Luke 12:48 * Life has a way of overgrowing its achievement as well as its ruins. --Edith Wharton * Everything not forbidden is compulsory. --T. H. White
388

GUA 56, LU3, THE WANDERER
Binary 001 101 = 13; Gen below, Li above
56.X, Overall Image Atop the mountain is a flame The wanderer The noble young one, accordingly, is lucid and prudent
about the function of sanctions And thus avoids prolonged legal process
The nomad sets up his camp, where none have chosen to live, and kindles a modest blaze. None but the homeless would call this a home, but like the flame his home is wherever his fuel is. He must take what he needs and move on. What he carries is familiar to him. His best friend is a small, hot fire, without much smoke or signal. The rest of the world is new or strange, until he makes himself welcome, or until he can feel at home. If he cannot he might need to leave quickly. He will want to stay clear here, and remain his own judge. There is a challenging wisdom in keeping his security minimal. But a diplomat from the wider world has no diplomatic immunity.
56.0, The Wanderer With modest fulfillment The wanderer persists Promising
The stranger approaching the inn at the edge of the town has very little outside of himself to tell what he is to the others, whether he might be a pilgrim or bum, or a tourist gone native, a merchant, a fugitive from the good, or a refugee from the bad, the newest citizen here or a lesson painfully learned. Those who would keep moving freely practice a code of conduct and honor, trying to keep a buildup of trust which one bad rogue can destroy without effort. The benefits of doubt, the presumptions of innocence, are in delicate states of balance. With careful reserve and intelligence, free agents traveling lightly explore the landscape beyond the great watershed. Most of their souvenirs are memories or stories. Much depends upon what they can carry. A mouthful of sustenance, and a handful to spare, is great wealth, perhaps between weeks of having much less. Thus a modest fulfillment is all that the wanderer needs. He carries few tools, but each one has thousands of uses. Friendships, like a flame, can be easy to kindle but hard to hold on to. Nearly all his relations are distant, yet his best skill is making good will out of suspicion and welcome out of strangeness.
389

56.M, Key Words Traveler, stranger, itinerant, peddler, newcomer, visitor, guest, disciple, pilgrim Walkabout, vision quest; perpetual novelty, insecurity; caravanserai, inn, shelter Portability, light travel, roughing it, going native; ad hoc life, living without a net Earning a welcome; tact, wit, modesty, self-reliance, versatility, a few good tools Dynamic equilibrium, self-sustaining systems; the tactics of intrusion, diplomacy Varieties of people who wander, as a source of uncertainty, curiosity & suspicion 56.G, From the Glossary lu3 (a, the) wanderer, traveler, itinerant, guest, vagabond, stranger, wayfarer, visitor; wandering; order, sequence, arrangement; backbone, spine, strength; (to) travel, drift, wander, sojourn; dispose, arrange (to be) temporary, provisional, ad hoc; wandering, traveling, visiting, itinerant; a unit of 500 troops 56.T, Tuan Zhuan The wanderer
(Means) modest fulfillment The flexible finds the balance on the outside
And so complies with firmness Restraint along with dependence on clarity This is how, (with) modest fulfillment, The wanderer's persistence (is) promising The wanderer's appropriate timing (is) very important here!
390

56.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
(Fan Yao 30.1: taking steps, confused, respect avoids error)
The wanderer is fussy and annoying And so this position courts suffering
56.1x The wanderer (is) fussy (and) annoying: The objectives (are) exhausted (in) adversity He busies himself in trivial matters, treating this new place too lightly. The locals soon learn that this stranger is no king or god in disguise.* Such legends precede him, but he ruins this great introduction. For entering new situations, his humility is useful, but not humiliation. This calls down contempt, not a welcome. Wanderers and the homeless are very different breeds. The wanderer has many places to go. Humility is only one of a number of traits that the locals might look for. They may look for purpose without a hidden agenda, or dignity without distance, or a sense of humor about the human condition, without the sneering and cynical parts. The long-sighted pilgrim can let them know of his needs, or that he wished things were different. Neither bum, nor beggar, nor fool will have the luck an ambassador will.
56.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.2: cauldron full, rivals anxious, not our pursuit)
The wanderer comes to a camp Cherishing those resources And earning a young helper's loyalty
56.2x Gaining a young helper's loyalty: An outcome with no complaint The wanderer comes to the inn with his property still on his shoulders. Skilled and self-sufficient, but otherwise not wealthy, he offers to either pay or earn his night's lodging. The hot bath and rest are worth either. He carries what tools he will need inside the rest of his home. The first time he hears you are welcome, this is only a formality, and a challenge to hear it again but spoken sincerely. Innkeepers learn to be wary. But this wanderer has the habit of being a guest in a truly great home, each new land a new room, entering and parting, and faring well a lot,with his open-ended closure, and always welcome back. Fire dances atop the log to celebrate moving on. Once again he transforms an innkeeper's tension and doubt. Another fireside story, hot meals and a journeyman's new apprentice. Accommodation works both ways.
391

56.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.3: many liberties, regrets pass)
The wanderer sets fire to their camp And fails the young assistant Persisting is hard to do
56.3x The wanderer sets fire to their camp: And (only) then considers the harm here * Until (one) wanders with humility This principle (is) lost Of course the stranger is the primary suspect. He is only the wrong kind of wanted right now. Nobody knows where he comes from or goes. The world is wide, harsh and demanding, a school apt to toughen the kindest of nomads into a hardened old rogue. Condescension repels those who might aid him; and carelessness might burn down an inn. One does not make a life of building so many fires without some scars and burns, or without learning ways to defend oneself. Still must one guard against hardness of heart. Sense, sensibility and sensitivity are assets too precious to lose. Conscientiousness, conscience and consciousness are all the same traveler's tool. He has had far too little to lose here. Although he would soon move on, now is the worst time for leaving. Although he has nothing now, now is the best time to give.
56.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness
(Fan Yao 52.4: stilling one's being, not a mistake)
The wanderer stays in a shelter Having secured some wherewithal and an axe But lamenting "My heart is not at peace"
56.4x The wanderer (stays) in a shelter: (Having) not yet secured a place * Securing some valuables (and) an axe: (But with) a heart less than peaceful The wanderer locates a shelter, a little less than accommodating, but better by far than his own naked skin. Inside he's found an axe and some clothing, with enough dust on top to lay claim, and he still has most of his money. And yet he doubts his good fortune. Some exotic adventure this has turned out to be! The oxcarts rumble and creak overhead. His long-sought vista across the great water is just an uneasy watch from a hole. His axe feels more like a weapon than a tool, and his money feels more like bail or bribe. Instead of cavorting with the belly dancers, he gets to throw rocks at the rats. The road can get old; so can not bathing. But if the whole world is going to be his home, sometimes he will stay in the outhouse. To make himself at home is his job, and he's only halfway home. He lies down to dream of tomorrow.
392

56.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.5: commendable retreat, persistence is promising)
Hunting a pheasant One arrow is lost But in the end, a means to recognition and appointment
56.5x In the end a means to recognition (and) appointment: A superior reach In a distant land with no home or friend, on a journey with no beginning or end, the wanderer still has his best tools: modesty, tact and, above all, his wits. Knowing the worth of a good introduction, he shoots a pheasant to give to the local land's lord. While he has lost a much-valued arrow, he has gained a fine introduction and, if he wants it, both praise and office. If not, at least another hot meal. He hits on the right idea with a clarity of aim and not such a very long shot. The lord will know his peer when he meets one, by style and noble gesture, if not by his fancy palace. Again his good fortune has cost so very little, and he stays in a mansion instead of an inn. The whole point of being a seeker is found in being a finder. Here it is finding out where to alight, and how to come highly recommended, with only behavior for references.
56.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess
(Fan Yao 62.6: passing without greeting, calamity and suffering)
Like a bird that burns its own nest This strange individual begins to laugh
Then follows with wailing and weeping Forfeiting cattle in the exchange Disappointing
56.6x Considering that the wanderer is at the top This one is understandably burned * Forfeiting cattle in the exchange: In the end, nobody comes to enquire This rogue has too much self in his head. This place might have been his to enjoy, had he only valued the small things more, had he only been a much worthier guest. Humility being a thing for the oxen, his boasts soon make an end to his welcome. Thinking himself quite the phoenix, he sets his own nest ablaze. But as night falls he recalls he is homeless. What he is is a repulsive bird, with burnt, stinking feathers and no composure or nest. The whole point of a walkabout is in the return, finding good, robust mental health, even though not having a home can challenge anyone's sanity, and undermine any security. Where going solo or solitary has only led to solipsism, one has the wrong compass and maps, and a lot of losers get lost here. If a mind has been lost, something important went first, like gratitude or perspective.
393

56, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 60, Jie, Boundaries qian gua (inverse): 55, Feng, Abundance jiao gua (reverse): 22, Bi, Adornment hu gua (nuclear): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
56, Notes * 56.1 In ancient Greece, the gods Zeus and Hermes would disguise themselves as poor itinerants and go door-to-door testing the tolerance, charity and character of their people. You never knew if the stranger in front of you wasn't in fact one of the unknown gods. The benefits to the wanderer here, and what a social treasure this myth was, should be obvious.
56, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Chesed in Atziluth * Tarot: Four of Wands * Astrology: Jupiter in Fire
56, Quotations * All that is gold does not glitter; not all those that wander are lost. --J.R.R. Tolkein * To live outside the law you must be honest.--Bob Dylan * I have been a stranger in a strange land.--Exodus * Think, in this battered Caravanserai Whose portals are alternate night and day How Sultan after Sultan with his pomp Abode his destined hour, and went his way.--Omar Khayyam * The use of traveling is to regulate imagination by reality, and, instead of thinking how things may be, to see them as they are.--Samuel Johnson * Much travel is needed before the raw man is ripened.--Arabic proverb * If it is dark enough, one candle is plenty.--Arabic proverb * To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive.--Robert Louis Stevenson * Happiness is not a station you arrive at, but a manner of traveling. --Margaret Lee Runbeck
394

GUA 57, XUN4 (or SUN4), ADAPTATION
Binary 011 011 = 27; Xun below, Xun above; Chong Gua
57.X, Overall Image Subsequent winds, adapting The noble young one, accordingly,
sets forth the higher purpose in carrying out the work
The wind does not push itself into the crevice unchanged. It only adapts its way in, so it finds a home in all niches. A feeler root, then a complex of roots, a will to live, then a gnarly old tree. Repeated attempts will find the right path, as repeated steps will make one. Continuous subtle influence makes incremental gains. Wind blows and grass bends, so too with mind. The master repeats himself, but not to drive his message home. He speaks once to find and learn what might be resisted and again to complete the work. Science begins with hypothesis, not with developed theory. A mutable mind is matched to a mutating world. Perception adapts or means little.
57.0, Adaptation In little successes Worthwhile to have somewhere to go Rewarding to encounter a mature human being
Great minds learn to think twice, and not the same way each time. Learning can alter the mind and what the mind sees. If a higher purpose is to obey higher laws, it will let itself be adjusted, from the general to the specific, then look for the exceptions. Those with effective wisdom will discover what is before they decree what will be. The sage introduces his teaching, the king sets forth a draft of his orders, the diviner offers a brief to the seeker. And all crouch behind these first words, weighing initial reactions, searching for lines where resistance is least, or ways to enter the minds of their subjects and fellows, while taking the special things into account. The path of power does not simply blunder straight forward: it makes some allowance for how much greater reality is before presuming to change it. The real and the ideal need to be rubbed together for these adaptations to fit. This is why the mind is so elastic and plastic, suggesting that life is for learning first, and only later for teaching. Thus we begin with provisional plans and goals, then adapt our big ideas to all of those little details, where gods and devils live. Then meanings grow where meanings belong.
395

57.M, Key Words Penetrate, insinuate, encroach, conform, comply; gain admittance, entry or access Nichemanship; occupy, adjust, adopt, adapt, conform, submit, accommodate self Fitting in, fitness; subtlety, resilience, shape shifting; persuasion, sway; reconsider Finding a path of least resistance; asserting without aggression, subtle persistence In-formation, to assess before following through; learning and teaching processes Reconnoiter, many-angled approach; rethinking, thinking twice, second thoughts
57.G, From the Glossary Xun4 (to) penetrate, enter, gain admittance, gain entry, gain access, reach into, insinuate, coax, wheedle, infringe, infiltrate, influence; adapt, conform, yield (to); submit, resign, accommodate; take (place, form, shape); withdraw (s, ed, ing); (a, the) entry, access, penetration, adaptation, encroachment(s), admittance, adaptability, accommodation, conformance, versatility, finesse, subtlety, resilience, [plasticity]; (to be) submitted to, put into, adaptive, adapted to, accommodating, submissive, following, subservient, docile, humble; versatile, opportunistic; withdraw or retreat to go around, with no intention of giving up; also pronounced Sun4
57.T, Tuan Zhuan Repeated adaptation (is) useful (in) setting forth the higher purpose
The firm adapts with balance (and) integrity And so the intentions (are) carried out
The flexible both respond to the firm So there are, accordingly, little successes Worthwhile to have somewhere to go Rewarding to encounter a mature human being
396

57.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.1: returning to one's path, how is this an error?)
Advancing and retreating Warranting a warrior's resolve
57.1x Advancing (and) retreating: The purpose wavers * Warranting the warrior's resolve: The purpose (is) under control He vacillates pro and then con in intention. His small intent to move forward or right is undone by another to move back or left. The subject or self is subject to a whole herd of fancies and whims, which vote to go one way, but then change their minds. The self is really a larger community, a collection of selves, always shifting. Often there's no one to lead, no chain of command, or no established set of priorities. It is possible, in theory, to harness a thousand rabbits to pull the chariot forward, but the ramifications and variables will harm net direction and speed. Each vector has worth, but one is made null by another. A warrior will want a simpler harness, on a single, spirited beast. His urgency needs the time, and clarity, not commotion. This is his ruling thought, but it bends to his will and learns. He will not win a fight doing kata.
57.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.2: advance to cliffs, drink and eat, honk and honk)
Subtleties happening under the bed Employing scribes and diviners, a confusion of these Promising No harm done
57.2x A confusion of these holds promise: (In) regaining balance Something is crouching beneath the bed, like wind stirs behind the curtains at night. It nags at his rest from below and disturbs his soft zone of comfort. What hidden creatures, low and sub-conscious, lurk down there, recessive truths in secret places, unseen to the untutored vision? In the terra incognita, aye - here there be monsters. And so he calls in the experts, to expose and uncover his fears: first a confusion of priests and diviners to find and define the unspeakable thing and then a confusion of wizards and shamans to coax the thing out and banish it back to the void, or drive it into the light. To make it known or give it a name is often enough to empty the thing of its charge. An unknown keeps the attention awake until it's thought to be known. Sometimes we like to know because we like to sleep. Mystery is a strong stimulant.
397

57.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.3: scattering one's sense of self, no regrets)
Recurrent adaptations Embarrassing
57.3x Recurrent adaptation's embarrassment: The purpose (is) exhausted His repeated attempts to push through all seem to push from the same direction.* It may be time to rethink the worth of this whole approach. A breeze seems to have more wits: when it goes its way with direction, this does not mean that it makes no turns. At the first confrontation with what will not sway, it will seek out the limits of what has opposed it. It will turn to the side to find itself free. It is broader than its obstacles, it moves through a wider world. In firmness, it's steady, not stubborn, in yielding, it's patient, not flaccid. Moving according to narrow ideas will show no regard for the real. If at first it doesn't succeed, it will fail and fail again. Repetition is not continuity. We change as our experience grows. Trials should precede errors. The pathological process and maladaptive behavior have lost their sense of context.
57.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.4: creel holds no fish, dawning disappointment)
Regrets pass In the field take three kinds of game
57.4x (In) the field take three kinds (of game): This will be an accomplishment To focus on one thing at a time is not always the smart way to think. Suppose that he needs to get three things out of the garden: a carrot for his meal, a turnip for his guests and a rutabaga for the sacrifice. If he only paused for a moment, and spent some time in his mind, he'd find that he does not need to make three separate trips with his shovel. Adaptive behavior is versatile. This is how a mind can make up for all the trouble it causes, and pay its rent in the skull, how air and distance are useful. We can examine our theory both in the mind and the world. We'll think it through first, start with a plan, and then change it as it needs changing. Hunting and seeking, when bound or confined to the things we expect, will only use half of our wits, and the game is too clever for halfwits. A flexible response looks into the actual niches.
398

57.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.5: correcting father's fixations, use praise)
Persistence is promising Regrets pass Nothing cannot be turned to advantage Regardless of beginning, there will be an outcome Before reforming, three days After reforming, three days Opportune
57.5x Nine fifth holds promise: The position (is) correct (and) central His first attempt throws him back on himself, as a breeze first backs up to overleap the mountain, informed now by what has occurred. The wind, in ever-resilient ways, keeps after the problem. Getting impatient too soon is thinking in one dimension, and so many of our thoughts can be linear, like lines from the start to the goal, which ignore both surprise and advantage on route. But there are more dimensions than one. Even the shortest of moments might be at least six days wide. A wise one will make adaptable plans. Three days before making his changes, he watches the nexus of forces gather. For three days after, he watches how things are unfolding. At any point here he is ready to shift his direction as needed. A process is not the same as a thing. To mistake reforming and learning for things will take them out of context.
57.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.6: well comes in, do not cover, be true)
Subtleties happening under the bed Losing some valuables and an axe Constancy has its pitfalls
57.6x Subtle (things) happening under the bed: The top (is) exhausted * Losing some valuables (and) an axe: "Correct" along with unfortunate Something is crouching beneath the bed, like wind stirs behind the curtains at night. Oh, is that so? He decides that he will not be fooled twice. The last time this thing happened, it was only a couple of spooks, and it cost him a bundle for all of those wizards and priests and scribes and diviners, just to settle his nerves. He decides that he has been there and done that now and needs not go there again. Content with his better sense, and certain of his maturity, he assembles his fine explanation, solidly based upon one single case, and goes right back to sleep. But sometime between this dream and the dawn, these spooks run away with his treasures, they spirit away his belongings. Of course the mind needs to generalize. It needs to oversimplify things. Sometimes it thinks belief can stand in for learning. But then it gets mysteries back.
399

57, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 51, Zhen, Arousal qian gua (inverse): 58, Dui, Satisfaction jiao gua (reverse): 57, Xun, Adaptation (chong gua 3) hu gua (nuclear): 38, Kui, Estrangement shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
57, Notes * 57.3 Insanity: doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results. --Albert Einstein (attributed)
57, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Yetzirah of Yetzirah * Tarot: Prince of Swords * Astrology: Aquarius Ascending, Fixed Air
57, Quotations * At least I knew who I was when I got up this morning, but I think I must have changed several times since then. --Lewis Carroll * And the wind - the wind / the wind hides in a hollow tree and whistles out at me. --Lawrence Ferlinghetti * We think in generalities, but we live in detail. --A. N. Whitehead * ... the magic of necessary words ... . Words that may become alive and walk up and down in the hearts of the hearers. --Kipling * Speak to each one in accordance with his degree of understanding. --Mohammed * No problem is too difficult to be solved by a theoretician. --Arabic proverb * I can't give you brains, but I can give you a diploma. --The Wizard of Oz (paraphrase) * Sell your cleverness and buy bewilderment. --Rumi * Adaptability is not imitation. It means power of resistance and assimilation. --Gandhi * In the struggle for survival, the fittest win out at the expense of their rivals because they succeed in adapting themselves best to their environment. --Charles Darwin
400

GUA 58, DUI4, SATISFACTION
Binary 110 110 = 54; Dui below, Dui above; Chong Gua
58.X, Overall Image Interconnecting pools Satisfaction The noble young one, accordingly,
joins with friends for discussion and practice
Pleasure on the surface and pleasure in the depths. Like we were taught as children, the magic word is still please. There are multiple pools involved here, many wetlands and lochs. The water in time will be one, inseparable, seeking its one level, borrowed back and forth, circulated between selves, and only stagnant if pooled in one body. And thus there is giving and taking, as one reflects another, and the one who gives is enriched, and the one who takes enriches the giver. Encouraging each other is a highly contagious cure for disease. The world improves in resonant ways when a few improve their moods, awash in their feelings, clean, refreshed and replenished.
58.0, Satisfaction Fulfillment Rewarding to persist
There is a lot of proper time to savor enlightened self-interest. Life's serious sides, the long cultivation of character, careful choosing of proper paths, the short and long term deferrals of gratification, pay off after some time is invested. To not taste and savor the fruits of this work is absurd: these are just desserts. Nor is there need to divide the high and low pleasures, or the sacred from the profane. If choices were made to live well, then vivid enjoyment of a life well-lived should not be unexpected. The wisest of minds will remember what it is made of: its living nerve and the nerve to live. Now and again this wants stimulation. It's still a big mystery, but somehow the erotic dimension of life holds the key to creation of life. Appetitive behaviors, or wants and desires, set us to work toward our goals. Happiness is not a good pursuit, but the sign of a good pursuit, a sign that something is found. The sage loosens up with his fellows, with all sorts of oral behaviors, plays games with his good friend the witch, happy with wine and herbs, awakening all his best senses. So how do we deserve this, with all our guilt and shame? With our gratitude, even with no gratitee.
401

58.M, Key Words Free, open up, clear out; barter, bargain, negotiate, weigh, exchange, pay, redeem Enjoyment, pleasure, happiness, delight, relish, relief, gratification, self-interest Harvest, reaping rewards, fruits; compensation, incentives, persuasion, satisfaction Hedonics, pursuit of pleasure and happiness as intrinsically benign and instructive Encouragement, desire, attraction, welcome; charm, enchantment, bewitchment Ananda, eros, cheer, epicurean hedonism, need/want as driving force in evolution
58.G, From the Glossary dui4 (a, the) joy, pleasure, happiness, satisfaction, delight, gratification, rejoicing, openness, exchange, mouth, passage, opening, aperture; (to be) open, free, clear, acquiescent, accepting, glad, happy, fond of, responsive, oral; (to) exchange, pay, barter, deliver, give an equivalent, trade, transact, weigh, share; open a passage through, open up, clear away, convert, gratify, rejoice; speak (s, ed, ing); [consensual behavior, voluntary transactions]
58.T, Tuan Zhuan Satisfaction
(Means) pleasure The firm (is) within and the flexible without
Pleasure, accordingly, rewards persistence And so it is complying with heaven
And resonant in humanity (When) pleasure (is) used to lead a people The people forget their weariness (When) pleasure (is) used in challenging difficulties The people forget their mortality Pleasure's great importance
(Is) truly in the people's encouragement!
402

58.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.1: rump belabored, in valley of gloom 3 years)
Responsive joy Promising
58.1x Responsive joy holds promise: The behavior (is) not now in doubt The things conducive to joy can come and go like the tide. The high tides are seldom the problem and they don't overstay their welcome. But when the fullness and flow go out with the tide, what will sustain us then? One of the sillier things that we do is to feed on ourselves. In the name of self-reliance, we may turn inward for strength. But this is no place to draw the waters which have now left us. The trick is to find it at low tide as well, when great ebbs leave us stranded from Ocean. The resourceful folks might comb the few pools remaining, and make a game out of rounding up interesting creatures, and enjoy the tide's ebbs for variety's sake. Joy can dwell in strange places: after all, life was born in these pools and depressions. Life is such that it's hard to be whole or fulfilled by ourselves. We want a world to respond to.
58.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.2: bound to little child, giving up one of maturity)
Trusting joy Promising Regrets pass
58.2x Trusting joy holds promise: A belief (in) the purpose Joy is a subject. To have faith in an object of joy, and hang one's hopes thereupon, will teach us that joy, unlike faith, is no nun. She will sleep with the saint one night and then run off with a shaman or witch. She plays the field far too well, loving both faith and uncertainty. For her, this is a wonderful world to be so worldly in. But to count upon joy or happiness, perhaps as our reward for being so well-behaved, is to ask for mental illness. To even think to keep her at home is vexation itself. We look for joy to affirm our convictions, or to tell us that we are on the right path. She is a fine omen indeed, and sometimes she may even come when she's wanted, but this is not proof of merit or worth. To leave the doors open is sometimes all we can do, focus on our work to keep ourselves worthy, and not whine when an episode ends.
403

58.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 43: Guai, Decisiveness
(Fan Yao 43.3: vigor in cheeks, presuming worst, alone in rain)
Future joy Disappointing
58.3x Future joy holds disappointment: The position is not appropriate A pool or a pond begins with some kind of depression, hollow, waiting for fullness. And truly much can be said for deferring gratification. But joy is never tomorrow; always or never sometimes, when hijacked by emotions, or past, if being nostalgic, or right now as it is happening. When saving up for great joys to come, we empty our hearts till it hurts, the better to suck the joys in. Then we'll try to be idle, saving ourselves for the time, dismissing the lesser, more worldly joys, keeping busy with distractions, indulging in things that kill time. Our time will be dead soon enough. If the joy we await takes much time to respond, it will find us too weak to embrace it. Waiting for one great ship to come in, one can miss two ships worth of rowboats. The poor souls who await their heaven to live will not have a clue what to do there.
58.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
(Fan Yao 60.4: content with the boundaries, fulfillment)
Measured joy is less than serene Limit the anxiety to own happiness
58.4x Nine fourth's happiness: There will be rewards He contrives to collect and examine one of each kind of pleasure. His journals are marked up with assorted descriptions and symbols, ratings for health and intensity. He speaks cleverly, and at length, on topics of pleasure. He knows which joys are high and most sacred and which are low and profane, and can list, in proper order, all of those in between. And of course he suffers from assorted small ills attendant upon such anxious reflection, and the naggings of choices forgone. He makes it all so complex, with all of this fussing and fretting. But, that being said, there is a due and optimum order to arranging one's satisfactions: to take care of the basic needs first, that they don't turn into deficiencies, or problems of mental health. Then we move on to life's finer wants and fulfillments, such as jumping naked into the lake.
404

58.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister's Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.5: Lord Yi's daughter's dress unequal to her maids')
Trusting in the unsustainable There will be struggles
58.5x Trusting in the unsustainable: (Though) the position (is) correct (and) appropriate Unconditional love and acceptance, a compassion for all living things, did not make the world we know. The beauty we see around us, the health that we enjoy, the set of senses we use to know this life and the wits to make our lives work, only exist because our world is ever renewed as the unfit are swept from existence. The loving and nurturing mothers in nature might kill and eat the runts of their litters to spare the rest from diseases. Compassion is still a good thing, and a heart ought not judge or choose, but denying selection is mindless, and harmful to all. Looking for joy in inferior places is waiting for fullness in waning moons. The joy which derives from ephemeral causes extinguishes itself. Enduring values will value what will endure. Why glue autumn leaves to the tree? The secure joy accepts the due order of things.
58.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao 10.6: study steps and omens, if full circle, most lucky)
Drawn by satisfaction
58.6x Top six (is) drawn by satisfaction: Less than enlightened It is in our nature to do things when we think there will be rewards. Life will even build some of this into its structure, and use our own glands to play tricks on our minds. But satisfaction still measures the success of our pursuits. Joy is only one consequence of living life correctly. When it becomes the pursuit in itself, then life gets turned around and effect starts to act like a cause. Then behaviors which lead to rewarding feelings begin to become interchangeable. We will start to look for the shortcuts. An identity built on one's work, and higher purpose in life, is traded for the quick fixes. We might be seduced from our paths by anyone holding rewards. We'll look for our signs of success in all the wrong places: it is always somewhere outside us, somewhere to move on to. Inhabiting our places is our highest reward.
405

58, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 52, Gen, Stillness qian gua (inverse): 57, Xun, Adaptation jiao gua (reverse): 58, Dui, Satisfaction (chong gua 6) hu gua (nuclear): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
58, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Briah of Briah * Tarot: Queen of Cups * Astrology: Pisces Ascending, Mutable Water
58, Quotations * Real happiness is cheap enough, yet how dearly we pay for its counterfeit. --Hosea Ballou * Unhappy is the man, though he rule the world, who does not consider himself extremely blessed. --Seneca * What hunger is in relation to food, zest is in relation to life. --Bertrand Russell * while you and I have lips and voices which are for kissing and to sing with who cares if some one-eyed son of a bitch invents an instrument to measure Spring with? --e.e. cummings * You have only to let the soft animal of your body love what it loves. --Mary Oliver * Follow your bliss. --Joseph Campbell * Happiness is wanting what you get. --Anon * The trick is in what one emphasizes. We either make ourselves miserable, or we make ourselves strong. The amount of work is the same. --Carlos Castaneda * If the only prayer you say in your whole life is "Thank you," that would suffice. --Meister Eckhart
406

GUA 59, HUAN4, SCATTERING
Binary 010 011 = 19; Kan below, Xun above
59.X, Overall Image The wind passes over the water Scattering The early sovereigns, accordingly, made offerings to the divine
and founded ancestral shrines
The wind moves over the water, passing the moisture around throughout the climate, bearing a myriad aeroform seeds, with hopes of life to continue in far distant lands. The wind fills the sage's sails as well, as it carries his little boat over great waters, as a great spirit once moved, back when it all began. Trusting in that which endures, he will sow his wisdom into the wind. Risking all for everything, he rises into the higher states of existence, turning his life into example, his example into a teaching, into a dharma. To survive in the long run means making friends with the boundless. This will mean changing his state, planting viable seeds, and a temple when he can.
59.0, Scattering Fulfillment The sovereign approaches his temple Worthwhile to cross the great stream Worthwhile to be dedicated
The sovereign prepares to go beyond, to learn of a greater glory, to leap beyond the limited. His ancestor's message, his story, is heard across the ages. His own will be one day as well, carried on by the memory of life. Friends might reach out to friends across the great stretches of time, from thousands of years and cultures away. Life will distribute its life, as evolution diversifies forms. It will change some things into others. Life is not diminished thus: the web grows tighter and stronger, ecosystems gain depth. But communing with these higher powers, with the forces that encircle the world and carry themselves down through the ages, will in some way demand our surrender, some degree of change in ourselves so complete that we might not be recognized later. A little pond turns itself into a cloud to cross the desert's expanse. The teacher survives the dark ages by becoming a couple of stories. The sovereign is carried by the memory of his reign. As a single flower becomes a thousand seeds, this life will soon be gone: into every niche it can find and take hold in. Thus we can reappear in many places at once. A kind of informed light was all that we ever were.
407

59.M, Key Words Distribute, disperse, disseminate, propagate, dispel, diffuse; to broadcast, as seed Dissociate, disincorporate, sublimate, dissolve, dissipate, rarify, diversify, expand The mystic's truth, reintegration with a higher unity, ecstasy, surrender, embrace Changes of state: melt, dissolve, evaporate, evanescence; subtlety, metasolutions Disintegrate, reintegrate, a breakup or breakdown of structure; reunion, salvation Transcendence, metamorphosis, sublimation, opening up, letting go, going to seed 59.G, From the Glossary huan4 (a, the) diffusion, sublimation, distillation, evaporation, rarifaction, broadcast (as seed); [change of state]; (to) disperse, scatter, distribute, disseminate, dispel, break up, disintegrate, dissolve, clear up, relax, relieve, melt, vanish, diffuse, evaporate, flow in scattered directions, rarify; fade, relent, give way, succumb (s, ed, ing); (to be) slack, broad, swelling, wide, scattered, diffuse, evanescent, dispersed, volatile 59.T, Tuan Zhuan Scattering fulfills
The firm comes forward, yet will not be exhausted The flexible learns (its) place on the outside
And associates with the superior The sovereign approaches his temple:
The sovereign is then in the center Worthwhile to cross the great stream:
Relying on wood brings results
408

59.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
(Fan Yao 61.1: readiness promising, presuming more, no comfort)
Rely on assistance The horse is powerful Promising
59.1x First six holds promise: (In) acceptance Reaching beyond our selves and our own resources is our first movement into the greater world. Surrender to higher powers and forces is frightening to young egos, so the next state above and beyond this is made to look more familiar. The forces which heal or aid us are totems with animal powers, or medicines which embody an animal's special gift. The one who will save us from human error looks human too, except for transcending error. Paths are set forth for the newly arrived. But most of us will not soon outgrow them. When we need strength, endurance and power, why not reach into dream time and ride a totem horse? Piglets would perceive the divine as infinite food and mud. Fishes would see this as water. Humans, as all we could wish for, or someone to set us some limits. We will have what we are ready to have.
59.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.2: prying perspective profits a girl's persistence)
Scattering, then hurrying to one's support Regrets pass
59.2x Scattering, (then) hurrying to one's support: To secure the hopes He has a little idea of how the universe works. Invoking often has helped him get used to some other perspectives. He still rubs his thing for good luck; his idols are well-fed and shiny. When troubled, he needs but call out to his long-dead savior. He has so much security now, how will the next step be taken? Truth is too alien still, and inhuman. Because truth is so very much more than human, humans will band or huddle together and make sure that this part of truth is not seen. Artifice and artifact, steps, altars and tables, numbers and letters, words and ideas, become the ultimate stuff of the world. Trees are illusions, as is anything created more than a few days before us. What a small world we build here for fewer regrets! Illusory trees reach out for more world, up for more fire and air, down for water and earth.
409

59.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.3: recurrent adaptations, embarrassing)
Scattering one's sense of self No regrets
59.3x Scattering one's sense of self: The purpose lies beyond He defies the toxic ideas that say to explore no further, and is setting himself aside to learn of a few more perspectives. Much of the search for truth is done from one point of view, a confusion of transient entities known as the self. Moving through time, this point becomes a thread or a path. Traced through space, threads become fabrics and paths become fields. Sometimes this will show order and sometimes a tangled mess. Within this, where are the boundaries, where are the limits of self? We reach into family and race, into species, order, phylum and kingdom, into the stuff of the earth and the stuff of the stars. But this is only what we are if we can keep ourselves fed. That all is one is not the end. It is only a better place to begin. Can we, should we, break open our heads, and let this larger world come through?
59.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao* 06.4: unable to contend, take up a higher purpose)
Scattering those groups Most promising Scattering claims the high ground* This is not commonplace thinking
59.4x Scattering those groups (is) most promising: Exemplifying maturity He will not dissolve in dissent or one side of the issue. There isn't a set of beliefs which doesn't leave something out, or defend itself against some part of the truth. Human belief is parochial, it is narrowed to local objectives. To dissolve into this is never a perfect solution. One with higher standards will be on his own, lost first in his own best interest, or maybe a higher purpose. The eclectic mind discriminates, yet every source may be resource: the fool on the box in the park, or the nut with the net chasing faeries. Much of use or value might be found printed backwards, between lines, or even turned inside out. This does not make it worthless. To pick and choose only the best and move on with the highest grade ore, affiliate lightly, understand deeply, embrace opposites and paradox: this is mind's higher ground.
410

59.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience
(Fan Yao 04.5: youthful inexperience, opportune)
Evanescent as sweat And that great cry for help Scatter the royal stockpiles Nothing is wrong
59.5x The royal stockpiles, (yet) nothing (is) wrong: (With) the proper dignity After only a few generations, the steady state of things cannot hold. An end time has arrived, the focal point collapses. No institution is able to resist the changes forever. The king abides in his feverish sweat, his cries carried off by the wind, the change of state from solid into liquid and gas has begun, a newer state of relief, taking out heat in the process. The timing is perfect for falling apart, for allowing it all to go. The world does not have to end here, only a human-made structure. If the king has some grace and dignity left, he may give a few final commands and open the doors to the granaries, and maybe the door to the vault. If ever he envied that fellow who lives in the forest, aimlessly tracking up virgin terrain, now is the best time to go. Disaster, or childhood's end? Mulch and some seeds still remain. Give it to time.
59.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure
(Fan Yao 29.6: bound, and imprisoned, three years without gains)
Dispersing one's hot-bloodedness Getting distance Far away to reappear No blame
59.6x Dispersing one's (hot-)blood(edness): Removed from suffering Some say it is living to steam up with passion, to burn oneself up with high heat, to bleed much and often, for this means that they have made contact. And yet it is this, not staying away from trouble, which will leave them numb and thick-skinned. Passion is much more fun when it gets to choose where and how it plays, but this might mean cooler hearts and minds, with plenty of air, wind and distance to take away some of the heat of hot blood. Those emotions wrongly called strong become vapor and steam: this is the best way for them to get carried away. Resentment and jealousy, anger and fear: detachment from these is not anesthesia, it is staying away from entanglements and unenlightened activity. The climate is rich with alternative states to explore. In some of these, angst and suffering are but voluntary endeavors.
411

59, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 55, Feng, Abundance qian gua (inverse): 60, Jie, Boundaries jiao gua (reverse): 48, Jing, The Well hu gua (nuclear): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
59, Notes * 59.4 Perhaps the first formulation of eclecticism (Za J ia or The Miscellaneous School): to select only the best from a number of sources and not to be bound to or within any one creed or group. This is a much higher position, still but poorly understood by the majority, who prefer the contrivances or the trappings in 59.2. This higher order is again referred to in the Fan Yao 06.4 as the way beyond conflict.
59, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Zain; Path between Hod and Tipareth (Trad: Tp-Bn) * Tarot: The Lovers (The greater embrace) * Astrology: Third House, Mutable Air, Gemini
59, Quotations * I came like water, and like wind I go. --Omar Khayyam * ... The mind / passes, the eye closes, the spirit is a passage; The beauty of things was born before eyes and sufficient to itself; the heart-breaking beauty Will remain when there is no heart to break for it. --Robinson Jeffers * For I have never seen, and never shall see, that the cessation of the evidence of existence is necessarily evidence of the cessation of existence. --William De Morgan * ... the ultimate wisdom, which deals with beginnings, remains locked in a seed. --Hal Borland * ... many people who imagine that they can talk and think about metaphysics wouldn't know it if they found it in their soup. --Idries Shah * There is a difference between spirit things and bodily things. Nothing bodily dwells in another. But spiritual things dwell in each other. --Meister Eckhart * To the question "Where does the soul go when the body dies?" Jacob Boehme answered, "There is no necessity for it to go anywhere." --Aldous Huxley
412

GUA 60, JIE2, BOUNDARIES
Binary 110 010 = 50; Dui below, Kan above
60.X, Overall Image Over the pond there is water Boundaries The noble young one, accordingly,
regulates numbers and measures and weighs the merits of action
Water spills over the dam and the bridge, too much to contain or control. Without a way to pass what we can't use along, or to store more than a little bit extra, a flood like this could wash us away. So too with the things we desire, or our abundance of options to choose from, the feelings available to us: this could use a good channel, or places to go chosen wisely. This means measure and budget, proper restraint and proportion, ratios and rationality. But the artificial constraint which does no honor to natural law will not work: the water will find ways around it. Good boundaries are positive tastes, not restrictions. If choices are limited, the wise choose the best ones.
60.0, Boundaries Fulfillment Bitter limitations do not invite commitment
The world is far too big for one life. The options open to us are too vast and breed far too fast to act them all out. One person cannot even walk all of the possible paths through one tiny field. We cannot catch all the water in our miniscule pools, but we can choose what to keep and what to let pass. There are forms of life which know no internal limits, but these parasites and cancers kill themselves by killing their hosts. One measured step at a time: so grows the bamboo, in simple, attainable intervals. We regulate our behaviors, and of course we also take this too far. We make wars between the aspiring spirit and the body's sensitive balance. We lay restrictions on others, when afraid to be and do good alone and lead instead by example. There is indeed one great moral law: to respect the rights of others. But the moralist does not respect this. Tastes and choices are needed when our limits are reached, but to make them too hard or too soon will leave one empty in times of fulfillment and take all the joy out of living in danger on earth. Learning to follow natural law will ask what life is and needs first, to optimize limited resource. Guilt lives less than innocence.
413

60.M, Key Words Limitation, abridgment, articulation, definition, order, discipline, discrimination Terms, terminus, stipulation, condition, restraint, constraint, regulation, stricture Economy, moderation, self-control, measuredness, budgeting, thrift, allocation Due proportion, proper balance, ethical measure; the golden mean or middle way Systems of moral regulation and division, measured steps, discretion, specificity Epicurean hedonism, good taste with rational choice, caution, intelligent selection
60.G, From the Glossary jie2 (to be) restrained, constrained, moderate, temperate, controlled, articulated, limited, regular, defined, definite; (a, the) limit, restraint, constraint, limitation, regulation, (regular) division, rule, law, moderation, temperance, control, discipline, term, boundary, condition, articulation, article, joint, node, knot, period, time, degree, detail, section, segment, juncture, chapter, abridgement (s); (in due, duly) proportioned, in proper balance; (to) regulate, discriminate (s, ed, ing)
60.T, Tuan Zhuan Boundaries (mean) fulfillment
The firm (and) the flexible (are) evenly apportioned While firmness secures the center
Bitter limitations do not invite commitment: This path dead ends
Satisfaction behind movement at risk An appropriate place to use boundaries Balanced (and) principled in order to follow through
Heaven (and) earth (are) constrained And so the four seasons are completed Boundaries serve to define the measures (But) without encroachment on property (And) without harm to the people
414

60.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure
(Fan Yao 29.1: twice the exposure, into canyon's inner chamber)
Not going past the door to the courtyard* No blame
60.1x Not going past the door (to) the courtyard: Knowing free course (to be) hindered A real abundance of water would be pressing at the dam with more urgency or force. He already seems to know that when new prospects are ready they will also be more compelling. This is not a lack of adventurous spirit, but practice of proper discretion. There is quite simply no driving reason to go now, and outside the weather is nasty. He is not even drawn halfway towards the street yet. There are plenty of things to do while he waits, a pleasant journey made from walking to and fro, thousands of steps without leaving his mind, thrills to be had in counting up heartbeats: this too can be grand adventure. Limits look best when outside them are only bad ideas. Naturally water likes to keep moving and it will offer resistance to anything blocking its flow. Pressure to go will build in its time. There will be signs to open the doors and gates.
60.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
Fan Yao 03.2: ready suitor to wait ten years for young lady
Not going past the gate from the courtyard* Disappointing
60.2x Not going past the gate (from) the courtyard (is) disappointing:
Losing the crucial timing He is already outside the door, and sneaking a peek at the street from his courtyard. Still he is thinking and doubting too much. What are the ramifications? This street seems to go off in two directions at once. What if he goes the wrong way? Fearing no more than a possible error, he wraps himself up in anxious hesitation. The time is certainly more advanced than he is. His big chance will claw only once at this gate and depart with a snort of disgust. The private space of his courtyard might be seen any number of ways: as sanctuary and refuge, a place to get himself ready, a point of departure, or a place in which to be vulnerable, where his sheltered, timid life can be threatened and teased. Many choices exist in his mind, but there's only one way he will go. Paradise is a walled-in garden as well: will he be climbing these walls soon?
415

60.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.3: waiting in mud, inviting predators to approach)
Such a lack of restraint And therefore such lament Not a mistake
60.3x Lack of restraint comes to lament: Given this, who is to blame? Lament is not a mistake here. His conscience is right: he has been a bit of a swine. Wanting to see no connection between freedoms and limitations, extending himself and expanding his options in every direction at once, he finds himself swamped in the consequences, his sacrament profaned, with no zest left for flexing those infinite freedoms. The most compelling argument for liberty's free exercise is to be found in the way it instructs, in being able to blame nobody but yourself. Lament can be the beginning of a recovery, although sometimes a beginning can last several years. Priorities and values are subject to disease, but few investigate here. Crowds do not gather to stare at the wino; thieves know how much he is worth. Even the ones who love to cast blame pass by, trying not to look. This scene is rich in lessons on limits.
60.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
(Fan Yao 58.4: measured joy is less than serene, limit anxiety)
Content with the boundaries Fulfillment
60.4x Contentment with boundaries comes to fulfillment: Undertaking a higher path His limits are easy and natural, and they help to define his freedoms. What fails to bring him happiness, maybe following one second chance, he simply leaves behind. What does, he enjoys and then leave this behind as well, until it comes around again. Heaven is easy to get to: it begins where the earth ends, right at our feet. The sage goes there just by filling his belly. His being needs no coaxing to digest his meals. Hell is the difficult way to go, to be always somewhere else, split into one part which gives commands and another which must disobey. Excellent first limitations to have are to be finite and to know just where we stand. To be fulfilled here is the first real freedom. If we cannot have it all anyway, then resenting not getting too much is only distraction from all that remains. Ask what is the life we are best adapted to living.
416

60.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.5: informed commitment, a great noble's necessity)
Sweet limitations Promising To continue has merit
60.5x Sweet limitation holds promise: Occupying a place in the center The master's rules are good natured and easy to live with. He applies them just to himself, then lets successes command and compel. The discouraging thoughts and prohibitive rules play no great part in his law. Encouragement and challenge will do the work instead. An excellent taste for the good life has him tasting the good things that life has to offer. Numberless ages of struggling life whisper their secrets to him. The organs of sense, including the mind, already come well equipped to learn how to make more optimum choices, and satisfaction says when to stop. The proselytizing and promoting we do only adds to confusion. The distasteful things are often most thoroughly learned just by tasting. We'll also learn to sample things in small bites. Forbidden fruit is not really. When given free rein, life knows how to learn its limits.
60.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
(Fan Yao 61.6: rooster's crowing rises, persistence has pitfalls)
Bitter limitations Persistence is unfortunate Regrets pass
60.6x Bitter limitation (is) persistent misfortune: This path dead ends A broken quill and torn parchment. The moralist writes down some rules for others to follow. But the force of his resentment ruins the work. The bitter taste of his envy and fear is only a foretaste of life in his future, rotting remains of a life he will miss. He might be correctly afraid of his personal lack of resolve, and of the temptations he is told he must resist, but to structure his life by indirect method does damage to life and its spirit. It is better to let the child reach for the flame of the candle. Then he will know what hot means. Don't tell him a thing will kill him, but point it out when somebody dies in this way. These are the ways we grow, and fewer will actually die. We will not grow because we are told to. Prohibition does little more than organize the crime. If we must draw battle lines, then why not do so twixt stupid and smart?
417

60, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 56, Lu, The Wanderer qian gua (inverse): 59, Huan, Scattering jiao gua (reverse): 47, Kun, Exhaustion hu gua (nuclear): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
60, Notes * 60.1, 2 There is a topology here which wants to be understood. There is a door from the house into the courtyard and a gate from the courtyard into the world beyond. In line one, the subject has not yet been drawn even part of the way out. In line two, there is some restlessness or curiosity in evidence.
60, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Netzach in Briah * Tarot: Seven of Cups * Astrology: Venus in Water
60, Quotations * I am not eternity, but a man; a part of the whole, as an hour is part of the day. --Epictetus * Without a sense of proportion there can be neither good taste nor genuine intelligence, nor perhaps, moral integrity. --Eric Hoffer * Know your measure. --Arabic proverb * To drown in treacle is just as unpleasant as drowning in mud. --Idries Shah * Too unslept hath thy seeking made thee, and too wakeful ... Still thou art a prisoner - it seemeth to me - who deviseth a liberty for himself: ah! sharp becometh the soul of such prisoners, but also deceitful and vicious ... Yea, I know thy danger. But by my love and my hope, I conjure thee: cast not thy love and thy hope away! ... "Spirit is also voluptuousness," said they. Then broke they the wings of their spirit; and now it creepeth about, and defileth where it gnaweth." --Nietzsche, TSZ #8 * We cannot seek or attain health, wealth, learning, justice or kindness in general. Action is always specific, concrete, individualized, unique. --John Dewey * Morality is moral only when it is voluntary. --Lincoln Steffens
418

GUA 61, ZHONG1 FU2, THE TRUTH WITHIN
Binary 110 011 = 51; Dui below, Xun above
61.X, Overall Image Over the pond there is wind The truth within The noble young one, accordingly,
considers legal process while delaying execution
The wind moves over the pond, pushing the small boats from shore to shore. Each private pool is its own community, its own depth and surface, its own resources and reasons. Wind carries news between them, food and seeds too. In wind and wood are the secrets to seeing beyond, so that personal insights may gain overview and get wind of the greater world. Things are not utterly relative: even the relative view of natural law might know right from wrong, but special circumstances still mitigate and aggravate. If the law will not permit the judge to sit down to chat with a suspect, someone must seek out his point of view, be fair and just, and reach understanding.
61.0, The Truth Within Piglets and fishes* - promising Worthwhile to cross the great stream Worthwhile to persist
It is hard to not be largely contained in our small and native worlds. And it is good to enjoy being a pond, or a pool all our own, and to fill up our own little niche with our feelings and meanings. We love the hidden places where our secret selves can go swimming. We have privacy here; we have ways to make our lives feel important; we can be as intense as we want. But wise ones will also sail beyond, when the wind brings good news from the other, and welcome the boat which goes beyond the self, to circulate, to push back those limits and shores and broaden their horizons. When they go hunting and fishing for others, they first seek out the perspective and point of view of the others, if only to find the right trap or bait. The diversity of life begins as close as the family: early in life our young sons and daughters seem to belong to utterly different species. Cross a great stream and ethnocentricity fails; and when we choose to explore a more primitive forest or jungle, even anthropocentrics change. There are vast realms of beauty here which the human eye cannot see. And yet when we think that dolphins are smart, we're inclined to seek only minds like our own.
419

61.M, Key Words Inner, internal, central, core + sureness, sincerity, confidence, trust, belief, truth Insight, outlook, understanding, subjectivity, self-interest, inner nature, meaning Limited comprehension, internal assumptions, personal relevance and importance Relativity, perceptual limits, horizon, the little picture; trusting a being to be itself Standpoint, point of view, degree of comprehension, perspective, communicating Interpretations, translating differences, frames of reference; get inside to look out
61.G, From the Glossary zhong1 (a, the) balance, center, concentration, core, focus, heart, inside, interior, mean, median, medium, middle, midpoint, midst (of); midday, noon; (the) balance point, stable point, point closest to all options; bulls eye; (to be) accurate, central, balanced, concentric, concentrated, correct, in balance, inner, mediated, neutral, on target, right, tempered, true (to); average, mediocre, middling; amidst, among, between, in, inside, intermediate, into, in progress; centered in at the core/heart of; halfway between, midway, in the middle (of); (in, at) the center/midst of; within; proper, equilibrated, to the point; at mid-; (to) balance, center, concentrate, focus, mediate, temper, true, hit the center, attain, accomplish (s, ed, ing) fu2 (a, the) truth, the true, confidence, trust, assurance, belief, (good) faith, proof, conviction, sureness, sincerity, reliance, surety, certainty, credibility, conviction, verity, promise, loyalty, verification (s); (to be) true, sincere, credible, confident, honest, trustworthy, truthful, assured, reliable, sure (to); (to) rely on, believe in, be sure (of), verify, ascertain, validate, believe, have faith, trust, hold (that) (s, ed, ing); will surely, certainly, truly (be); can be trusted to, is certain to, is sure to
61.T, Tuan Zhuan The truth within
Flexibility dwells within while firmness secures the center Satisfaction with adaptation The true will then transform the realm Piglets (and) fishes - promising: Trust (is) extended to piglets (and) fishes Worthwhile to cross the great stream: Relying on a wooden boat's hollowness The truth within (is) accordingly worth (the) persistence: Then (one) resonates with heaven
420

61.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.1: rely on assistance, the horse is powerful)
Readiness is promising Presuming more is no comfort
61.1x First nine's readiness (is) promising: The direction has yet to evolve When the truth which lies within is working as it should, it might do more learning than teaching and have more questions than answers. That a thing can hold our faith, or be believed or convincing, will say more about the one who wants or needs to be certain than it does about the truth of that thing. Certain core levels of knowledge are indispensably useful, and one mind, with a couple of cultures around it, will have all of this most of us need. Sometimes it is good to go off on our own, to learn to hunt pigs by watching the pigs, learn to fish by studying fish. The wheel and fire are well enough known. There are down sides to too much knowledge and truth, or too much of presumption and prejudice, or too much of smugness and arrogance. Believing as little as necessary, unlearning when called for, will leave room to breathe in the mind.
61.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.2: granted ten pair shells, sovereign offers to Di)
The call of a crane in the shadows Her young ones respond to her I have a fine beaker of wine And I, with your help, will drain it
61.2x Her young ones respond to her: (From) within the heart's hope From his hiding place deep in the rushes, the young crane will reply to his mother's soft call with clear and precise harmonics. The simplest gesture will carry a complex meaning across a crowded tavern. When like relates to like there is seldom a need to shout. A gain in the power to hear might be accomplished two ways: by elevating the volume and making more noise, or by better attending the ears, with their need for occasional quiet. The first will be too intrusive to learn something new. Where two or more are gathered, a resonance will make up a truth of its own. We communicate more than we know. Resonance crosses great gulfs, even where our words can't go, so there is a truth beyond words, connecting things with harmonics. But the fact that one thing seems to ring true does not make it a truth. This is much bigger than that.
421

61.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.3: wheel throws spokes, man & wife wild-eyed)
Finding one's counterpart Perhaps to beat the drum, or maybe to quit Perhaps to weep, or maybe to sing
61.3x Perhaps to beat the drum, (or) maybe to quit: The position is not appropriate At last he meets his comrade. Or maybe not. Maybe this is a spy for the forces of evil, just waiting for a weakness to show. At the dizzying heights of his joy, he has nothing to grasp or cling to. Laughing and singing, or sobbing and sighing, a great truth can take both sides. But someone lacking a core or a central identity, someone who still needs to learn who he is, might lack the right tools to recognize the other. We all take in unique views of a scene: two eyes set apart already means two points of view. And all pools will bend and diffract the light a little. But purely relative truth will not work. It ends in codependence. Then one can be neither enemy nor a friend and nobody's message makes any pure sense. We'll end in a hall of mirrors, facing our own scattered lights. Some central truth must be presumed, even if it's a fiction.
61.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao 10.4: treading on tiger's tail, pleading and pleading)
As the moon approaches full The team horse runs away But nothing is wrong
61.4x The team horse runs away: Leaving (its) kind to rise up The moon is waxing gibbous, reaching for fullness, and the tensions build towards a high point. A need for fulfillment reaches a climax. As if in answer, the team horse breaks from his harness and bolts from his servitude. Masterless, proud and fast, he cannot now be more or less than the beast he was born to be, now living out his own central truth, not looking around for consensus to those who shared his yoke. Nor can he look for his nature in tasks attached to his nature by others, alien jobs like pulling that fool's heavy wagon around. Most humans excepted, we'll count on things to be simply themselves, to see by their own lights. If there is any wrong here it is in the driver's ideas of what the horse ought to be. These veneers of civilization and culture are peripheral truths to natural law and the being's original sovereignty.
422

61.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.5: granted ten pair shells, no refusing opportunity)
Being true is as good as a bond Make no mistakes
61.5x Being true is as good as a bond: The position (is) true (and) appropriate To seek an extensive self-knowledge, yet still remain human enough to get by and relate to the others, we have to find a common ground on which to build our trust. To this end we make rules and laws, and the standards and forms of social behavior, which often weigh more than they're worth. Is there not a better way? We humans can sometimes see higher truths, and we will sometimes trust those who share them. Yet it might be thought to be the lower truths which connect us, the natural laws and original natures we share. These are the ties that bind us most firmly. Would that we developed an ethic which asked us to stay true to these! We can count on the fishes and pigs to be only themselves. Being true is not to be told what the truth is: it is to learn who we are and then stay true to our nature. This is who honors our contracts.
61.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
(Fan Yao 60.6: bitter limitations, persistence is unfortunate)
The rooster's pronouncements rise into the sky Persistence has pitfalls
61.6x The rooster's pronouncements rise into the sky: How could this be continued? The clear crow of the cock attempts to pierce heaven itself. It falls somewhat shy of this goal but it still carries messages well. The rooster cannot fly up to heaven, so he counts on his self-expression to argue his case up there. The neighbors, of course, are thinking of outrageous fortune in terms of slings and arrows. One cannot expect much more from a bird with so little brain. And his call, after all, will still bring him ample rewards from the hens. This is what his nature allows him. This works as well for people, for the cocksure, blowhard, rooster-brained oratory that has humankind for its source, and for the hens who come closer to cackle about it. We go so far out of our natural way when we take these behaviors this far. Our universe of discourse reaches for roots in the sky, for outer or alien truths, as roosters making the sun rise.
423

61, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 62, Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess qian gua (inverse): 61, Zhong Fu, The Truth Within jiao gua (reverse): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess hu gua (nuclear): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
61, Notes * 61.0 Many interpretations of this phrase are based on unquestioned assumptions by some commentators that both pigs and fishes are stupid. But the authors of the Yi were keener observers of life than this. Pigs, in particular, are quite intelligent. And the word tun2 actually refers to suckling pigs, or piglets. My suspicion that "piglets and fishes" was a phrase which meant "sons and daughters" might be a reach, but it is based on separate, well-known associations of piglets with sons and fishes with daughters.
61, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Yetzirah of Briah * Tarot: Prince of Cups * Astrology: Scorpio Ascending, Fixed Water
61, Quotations * Truth has not such an urgent air. --Boileau * Everything is arranged in such a fashion that the worst of all tastes, the taste for the absolute, is cruelly teased and abused until finally man learns to incorporate some art into his feelings, and to prefer, if necessary, to experiment with artificiality. --Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil * It is good to express a matter in two ways simultaneously so as to give it both a right foot and a left. Truth can stand on one leg to be sure, but with two it can walk and get about. --Nietzsche * If the cultivation of the understanding consists in one thing more than another, it is surely in learning the grounds of one's own opinions. --J. S. Mill * The whole truth is native in you. --Meister Eckhart * The eye wherein I see the Divine is the same eye wherein the Divine sees me. My eye and Divinity's eye are one eye, one vision, one knowing, one love. --Meister Eckhart * Everything without tells the individual that he is nothing; everything within persuades him that he is everything. --X. Doudan
424

GUA 62, XIAO3 GUO4, SMALLNESS IN EXCESS
Binary 001 100 = 12; Gen below, Zhen above
62.X, Overall Image Over the mountain there is thunder Smallness in excess The noble young one, accordingly,
in conduct will exceed in respect In loss will exceed in sorrow In practice will exceed in economy
Thunder out of the mountain. Whether this rumbling reminder has come from the climate or gravity, whether it settles or unsettles the mountain, the animals vanish, birds take flight, the insects are two thirds antennae. The ones who play this safely are favored to keep on playing. By adopting their postures according to the threat, by hiding deep in their niches, or whatever else it may take, and some extra just for good measure, small things add up to security, with margins of safety larger than margins for error. It's an anticlimactic part of ambition that to seek greater worlds will shrink us; it's an irony of soaring so high that success is found in the landing.
62.0, Smallness in Excess Fulfillment Worthwhile to persist Appropriate for minor concerns, Not suited to great concerns The flying bird bequeaths this message: If not adapted to heights, adapt to remaining below Much promise
It might seem a little bit odd to hear the high-flying bird praised for a groundedness in its attitude. But birds do not conquer skies, and men do not conquer mountains. Once the mountain's peak has been gained, the rest of the trail goes down, unless we want to leap from the cliffs with some delusion of grandeur. The potential energy so hard fought for and won here is only a loan, and must be returned as long as our nests and homes are below. In proportion to the numbers a form of life breeds, the long-term odds of survival oppose it. What looks like success should be humbling. Nature, of course, knows no fury or wrath. Natural law has its own kind of justice. For those who have gone too far, its enforcement must be thought of as voluntary. Survival will favor the humble. What squeaks will continue to squeak, what draws too much attention only gets hunted down. High-flying birds have their limits too: that steady force which brings them back home binds heaven's behavior as well. The stars themselves obey this, a company noble enough to have some dignity left. If we accept these matters of fact with good cheer, we'll be lucky to settle for less.
425

62.M, Key Words Laws of averages, averageness, many too many; mediocrity, anonymity, triviality Overdevelopment, overpopulation, odds against one among many; self as a detail Humility, lowering expectations; settling for little or less; truth in scale, smallness Realism, ordinary reality, everyday suchness, nothing special, place in big picture Instinctual intelligence in species subject to predation, vulnerability, heedfulness, Watchfulness, vigilance, care(fulness), conscientiousness, awareness of finitude
62.G, From the Glossary xiao3 (to be) average, common, diminished, homogeneous, humble, insignificant, lesser, light, little, low(ly, er, est), mean, mediocre, minor, minute, modest, slight, ordinary, small(er, est), petty, tiny, trifling, trivial, unimportant, young(er, est), minimal; (a, the) commonness, homogeneity, littleness, meanness, mediocrity, pettiness, smallness; commonly, ordinarily; in detail; some small, of little, a little; for a short (time, while); (to) diminish, minimize, shrink, belittle; does not imply bad or wrong, but sometimes inferiority. guo4 (to) go beyond, go past, exceed, surpass, transcend, miss, stray from, pass (by, over); bypass, get by, transgress, trespass, stray, err, inundate, predominate, exceed proper limits (s, ed, ing); (to be) passing, transient, errant, past, in excess, extreme, exceptional, too much (of), excessive, beyond, above, overly, unusual, extraordinary; greater/larger than; (a, the) error, transgression, excess(iveness), fault (s); will err; to a fault, to extremity, to excess, to extremes
62.T, Tuan Zhuan Smallness in excess
The small are those who go beyond and so (are) fulfilled Exceeding, accordingly, (is) worth persistence
To take part in the time (is) to move The flexible gains the center
This is how minor concerns (are) promising The firm (has) lost position and also is not in the center
(And) so this is, accordingly, not suited to great concerns There is the flying bird's image herein
The flying bird bequeaths this message: (If) not adapted to heights (then) adapt to (remaining) below Much promise: Above (is) resistance while below (is) acceptance
426

62.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.1: meeting one's match or superior, 10 days no error)
A flying bird on the way to misfortune
62.1x A flying bird on the way to misfortune: Seeming ill-suited to the task The small who get by heed the timing of things. Clearly not all will succeed. Life has learned this, and brings forth the small in great numbers, that attrition might not take them all. Most of the young miss the fall migration, becoming statistics instead. The spare or extra young ones are not expendable though: most of these precious young things will be food. That even the small are now thriving is not an excuse to be heedless. But here we have a young raptor, perched on the edge of his nest, not fully fledged yet, but just dying to get out and ready to conquer those skies. A point of view from the future of raptors in general suggests now is the best time to fail, before he builds nests of his own. There are random events which could save him. The gravity will be lighter next week. A little distraction might buy him some time.
62.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao 32.2: regrets pass)
Passing by one's ancestor To meet with one's grandmother Wanting to reach one's superior But meeting another underling Not wrong
62.2x Not reaching one's superior: The underling does not allow bypassing It seems like he stands in line for half the morning, mooing and bleating with all of the others. His one great ambition today was to spend some high quality time with the spirit tablets left by his ancestors. But he cannot get past grandmother's diaries. Now he waits in a new line, to reach somebody in charge. But he can't make it past the third minister. This will not do, he explains, and he even tries reasoning. I cannot allow this, he's told, and no, you may not go around me, passing me by is against all my rules. Now if he can settle for less, he can still salvage part of the day, and have some success in his minor concerns. To be content with less is not always a failure and small successes do add up. But lack of humility here, not even suited to greater concerns, is an error of excess and asking for trouble all out of proportion to scale.
427

62.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
(Fan Yao 16.3: wide-eyed readiness regrettable, the slow regret)
One is never beyond defending oneself From behind someone might attack here Unlucky
62.3x From behind someone might attack here: Bad luck (only) seems responsible So far he succeeds in every least thing and small detail. It seems as if nothing can stop him. Even those creatures smaller than he is enjoy their own small successes. He is ready to move beyond caution and fear, beyond the small, petty things. With confidence raised, he turns his back on the weak little threats, forgetting somehow that weak little threats do most of their dirtiest work from behind. Vigilance looks forward in time, but in space it means all directions. It is good that he looks ahead, to get an idea of where he is going, but turning his back and resting assured is not. Not even the heedful are guaranteed further existence, only that odds will improve. Some are indeed out to get him: there is a food chain here, full of useful predators. He now wants the eyes of a predator's prey, to watch his own back and loose ends.
62.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity
(Fan Yao 15.4: nothing not worthwhile with candid authenticity)
Make no mistakes Do not be beyond greeting others in passing Difficult progress demands heedfulness Do not rely on unrelenting persistence
62.4x Do not be beyond greeting others (in passing): The position is not appropriate * Difficult progress demands heedfulness: In the end there is nothing friendly to longevity The earth seems far too prolific these days. It taxes the senses to take in all of those details. Even the mammals are swarming, and predators run in large packs. On the road to the market, anonymous throngs sweep past like a great river. The slow and the gifted, the depraved and the sane, all mix up well in the crowds. The wise must engage their wisdom, encountering something of each one in passing, catching the eyes and expressions, quick to underrate nothing. We would like our perceptions sketched in broad strokes, and human minds seem perfectly suited to this, judging quickly according to prejudice, using presumptions and profiles, the most data in the least time. To look all of this over, but overlook nothing, is out of our reach. Those who do the best become ancestors: they were ready to meet either patrons or thieves.
428

62.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.5: moved in neck & shoulders, avoiding regrets)
Thick clouds but no rain From our western horizon Even the prince hunts with tethered arrows Preferring that quarry inside the cave
62.5x Thick clouds instead of rain: (It is) finished up above Dense, lazy clouds from the west collect overhead, and below the hopes rise in the small, thirsty creatures. But the clouds just continue their easterly drift, as though indolence stole all their thunder, and complacency put them to sleep. Too aloof to crash against mountains, even the weather cannot manage greatness this gray day. The victims wander about, claiming their special privileges. Lotus eaters continue developing no art. No champions, no predators. The gentle prince hunts birds hiding in the cave, from storms that will not be coming, with aim not that of an archer and less than consummate skill, in slow to no motion. Nothing great will be caught on this hunt. It is trifles, haze and dimness, without shadows to fear or bright rays to blind, and chicken for dinner again. But think of all those things chicken tastes like!
62.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
(Fan Yao 56.6: bird burns nest, wanderer laughs, then weeps)
With no acknowledgement in passing others by The flying birds get distance from this one Bad omen Surely a sign of calamity and suffering
62.6x With no acknowledgement (in) passing others by: Beyond pretentiousness He masters a dunghill but thinks it a summit, and calls himself master of mountains. He passes an elder, but thinks him a beggar, and tosses a coin without looking. Little success will come with excessive smallness, but this is less than that. The one way the heedless can master all they survey is to shrink their world to near nothing and survey as little as possible, to wrap themselves up in themselves, stay in an ignorant mind, and heed no omens or portents. See the small birds keeping clear of this path, sensing disaster to come. A huge amount of smallness is here. Humans think that creation is all about them, and all of those countless galaxies are placed there to light our way badly at night. So all alone in this world, the smallness we feel is nothing to how small we are. We make a huge impression here, largely a huge embarrassment.
429

62, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 61, Zhong Fu, The Truth Within qian gua (inverse): 62, Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess jiao guo (reverse): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth hu gua (nuclear): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
62, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Atziluth of Assiah * Tarot: King of Pentacles * Astrology: Capricorn Ascending, Cardinal Earth
62, Quotations * Wisdom is ofttimes nearer when we stoop than when we soar. --Wordsworth * Not a day passes over the earth, but men and women of no note do great deeds, speak great words and suffer noble sorrows. --Charles Reade * It is with trifles, and when he is off guard, that a man best reveals his character. --Schopenhauer * Interesting people can find something interesting in all things. --Idries Shah * To carry the self forward and realize the ten thousand dharmas is delusion. That the ten thousand dharmas advance and realize the self is enlightenment. --Dogen * Enumerate as you may the parts of the chariot - you do not thereby gain the chariot. Better to rumble like rocks than to jingle like jade. --Laozi * Local activity is the keynote of the dervish path. --Yasavi * I believe that the first test of a truly great man is his humility. I don't mean by humility, doubt of his power. But really great men have a curious feeling that the greatness is not of them, but through them. And they see something divine in every other man and are endlessly, foolishly, incredibly merciful. --John Ruskin * To be really great in little things, to be truly noble and heroic in the insipid details of everyday life, is a virtue so rare as to be worthy of canonization. --Harriet Beecher Stowe * The invariable mark of wisdom is to see the miraculous in the ordinary. --Ralph Waldo Emerson
430

GUA 63, JI4 JI4, ALREADY COMPLETE
Binary 101 010 = 42 (2/3); Li below, Kan above
63.X, Overall Image Water positioned over the flame Already complete The noble young one, accordingly, contemplates sorrows
and so prepares to maintain against them
Water over a flame: a precarious but useful arrangement, if this can be maintained. Too much flame and the water dries up, but with too much water the fire goes out. Picture such a condition: clarity meets its best challenge, the mind and the world fit for a time. The setup is done, but only the past remains perfect. Success will never endure, although care will double its life. Up ahead is the least excitement, a balance maintained with light touches and no more exciting big swings. The steadiest state is dynamic, and done is only a point within the process, where things start falling apart. The birds fly south while the weather is still fine, moving a little ahead of the end.
63.0, Already Complete Fulfillment is minor But rewarding to persist At the beginning, promise; by the end, disorder
The bulk of the work is finished now, the shop is cleaned up and dismantled, helpers are dismissed. Working on the finishing touches, the fine grit takes longer to polish, and the last bit of progress is hardest to see. No more big chunks on the floor: we are down to small shavings and dust. It is time to fuss and fret, or to sell the thing, or smash it and move on. The work now gets its first coat of wax. Even a rigorous wisdom allows time for satisfaction, even some pride. But right in the middle of this, the scratches begin to appear. We'll guard against what we think are inferior forces, like a universe bent on entropy. But perfection is an unstable state. The system left to itself falls apart. The work's incompleteness was what kept it going; its finishing starts the decay. The building has turned from verb into noun. The real adventure is over now. Nostalgia for our vanishing pasts, outlived motives and selves, belongs to a world already eaten by time. Change is such that perfect or done is only a kind of fare well. Beauty is sad in this way. Thus are the first of the flaws made part of a tapestry's weave, and scattered leaves of fall, the best part of the best kept gardens.
431

63.M, Key Words Achieving order or perfection, finalizing, wrapping up, follow-up, winding down Final or finishing touches, loose ends; holding gains against diminishing returns Completion begins the maintenance, and decay; safeguarding prior achievements Epilogue, appendix, anticlimax, segue, afterthought; issues of past and perfection Momentum in decay; memory, retrospective, reminiscence, nostalgia, hindsight Final steps of the crossing, culmination, denouement, residuum, losing dynamism
63.G, From the Glossary ji4 (is/are, has/have) after, already, as long as, at last, entirely, finally, now that, having, once, since, upon, when (finished, done), while, whilst, (to) have done, attain, complete, be done with, end, exhaust, finish, get ... done (s, ed, ing); (to be) completed, consummated, de facto, done, finished, past, fixed, certain; end of event, particle of perfect tense ji4 (to be) complete, across, done, finished, accomplished, numerous; stately, dignified, beautiful, up to standard; of help, assistance; across (a, the) stream, river; (to) complete, conclude, succeed, finish, fulfill, perfect, achieve, increase, accomplish, stop, cease, ford, cross; (a, the) river, stream; benefit, assist, aid, contribute to, help, relieve, save, overcome an obstacle (s, ed, ing); (a, the) accomplishment, completion, obstacle overcome
63.T, Tuan Zhuan After completion (comes) fulfillment
The minor is that which fulfills Worthwhile to persist:
The firm (and) the flexible (are all) correct and also properly placed At the beginning, promise:
The flexible occupies the center By the end equilibrium results in disorder
This process (is) finished
432

63.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
(Fan Yao 39.1: if going is impassible, coming is respectable)
Braking those wheels Soaking one's tail* No harm done
63.1x Braking those wheels: Deserving no harm The driver succeeds in crossing the water and cuts loose his horses to graze on the farther shore. But in his hurry to rest here, he underachieves a bit. He brakes a little too soon and gets stuck in the mud. This is more work than expected, but at least he has made it across. It is past time to make great mistakes: even disasters are small. So what is a little backsliding? He loses a point for his dismount. Transitions from movement to rest are not made in instants. When at last he's across the half-frozen stream, the brave, young fox is exhausted, and anxious to rest. As he flops himself down on the far shore, he learns that his tail was only almost across. This tail takes hours to dry, but to dry it mid-stream would have been worse. Our loose ends and remaining details sometimes take half of the work. The way likes to tease final form.
63.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.2: waiting on the sand, the small will talk)
The matron loses her carriage's veil To not pursue this Means seven days to gain
63.2x Seven days to gain: By taking the middle path Her new carriage still has that new carriage smell. All else remains constant. But this missing detail blows itself out of proportion. The lady must travel in a conspicuous imperfection, in less than the perfect style, exposed to the crude stares and gruesome desires of common, everyday people. The weaver claims to be too busy to cater to such small items, but he might have time to fill the order next week, when he can fit a small thing into his schedule. It only took seven days to build the entire carriage! If she comes undone in the head, she will show her neighbors that she is not a lady and the folks will have a whole week of comic relief. The lazy weaver will tease her if she stays home fretting and fuming. Dignity might best be shown by moving on. Success in small matters might not be much, but in small matters failure is worse.
433

63.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
(Fan Yao* 03.3: pursuing the deer unprepared, lost in the woods)
The illustrious ancestor* subjugated barbarian country It took three years to conquer them Lesser people were not at all useful
63.3x Three years to conquer them: Exhausting Like the stories tell it, Gao Zong attacked the Gui Fang, land of the Devils. He made a legend in the process; some day he might be a myth. But while alive he was flesh, exhausted flesh doing dangerous work, taking twice the effort expected, and costing him years of his life. Nor could he quit when done, as devils love to regroup. All that remains is history and lessons. He no longer hurts, or aches for his family at home. Now that this is over and done with, the reality of it all faded, folks still tell the story, and like comparing themselves to the heroes, faring so well in their dreams. The kids play with Wu Ding* dolls now. Stories don't tell the smell of the blood, or the pain of a sword in the belly, but to understand the lessons, some of that urgency felt then will need to be recaptured. Competence and fitness were taught in that curriculum.
63.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.4: regrets pass, stay true, change the highest laws)
The silk jacket will wear into caulking rags Throughout the day be on guard
63.4x Throughout the day on Guard: There are reasons for uncertainty His boat is finished and ready to sail on even the stormiest waters. He climbs aboard at the launching, clad head to toe in the finest silk garments. And right by his side is his old friend Doubt, that pesky old pessimist, getting all excited at the smallest gray clouds, running around inspecting for leaks, moaning creaky duets with the rigging. But Doubt will earn his passage here. The whole second half of eternity lies in wait to ruin this boat. Time will indeed do horrible things, both to new boats and to these fine, silk garments. And when that time finally arrives, that lovely silk jacket of his will make a fine rag to plug up a leak in the hull. Entropy is the law, plan for it, and prepare to recycle. Knowing things change is more useful knowledge than hoping they'll stay the same. With our contingency plans, we progress in more dimensions.
434

63.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao 36.5: Ji Zi's brightness obscured, worth persisting)
The eastern neighbor sacrifices cattle Yet this is not equal to the western neighbor's
modest spring offering* The genuine received their blessings
63.5x The eastern neighbor sacrifices cattle: This is not equal to the western neighbor's timing * The genuine received their blessings: The good fortune (has) completely arrived The neighbor in the east sacrifices his best ox. The ceremony performed could not have been any more perfect. But still he can find no peace. The neighbor in the west, meanwhile, offers just two small baskets of grain, using the rite's shorter form, and he grins like a fool until fall. On the face of this, it doesn't seem fair, but there is no justice lost here. The eastern neighbor has shown the great spirits just how much he can spare, and then how much more he is willing to take. These do not lead to great satisfaction, even though he says please. The western neighbor sees things the other way round. He is offering out of last year's harvest and is saying thank you instead. East is where the day begins and west is where it ends. The time already completed is better suited to gratitude, for blessings already received. Sacrifice isn't for taking.
63.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.6: being true is as good as impressive, promising)
Soaking one's head Serious
63.6x Soaking one's head (is) serious: (But) how could this continue? If he's already across, then what is he still immersed in? Is that farther shore just not different enough? Does he now recount the steps of his crossing, rejoicing again in his better maneuvers, trembling again at all his close calls? This is not really across, but still in over his head, immersed in what was and what might have been, alive in a past worth a memory, but unable to swim, row or dwell there forever. There's much more to do or have done here than simply to cross the great stream. The reasons for crossing are still up ahead, and looking backwards like this keeps him but halfway there, with no more objectives in sight. Living fills up a mind, reliving saturates one. Yes, old man, sir, we have already heard this story, a hundred times told in the tavern. But still more impressive is how you avoid our question: After that what did you do?
435

63, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete qian gua (inverse): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete jiao gua (reverse): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete hu gua (nuclear): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 40, 64, 54, 38 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
63, Notes * 63.1, 6 As a clue to some of the line meanings: the authors had fun with wet tails and heads and braking wheels. Most people who try to interpret these lines tend to forget which shore they are supposed to be on, leading to wrong interpretations. Reading these lines, relative to where you are in the process of crossing the great water, it helps to imagine yourself there at the ford, or partway or nearly across. * 63.3 Gao Zong, the Illustrious Ancestor, was a Shang emperor, aka Wu Ding (r. 1229-1171 BCE). His exploits are also mentioned at 64.4. Only the tested and proven were employed after this was complete. And so, for the competent, this was not the end. Fan Yao 03.3 also speaks to the subject of competence gained from experience. * 63.5 This line is inconsistent with a theory we sometimes hear professed that private sacrifice was prohibited in the Early Zhou.
63, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Tipareth in Briah * Tarot: Six of Cups * Astrology: Sol in Water
63, Quotations * Two dangers constantly threaten the world: order and disorder. --Paul Valery * Of what small spots pure white complains. --John Donne * A finished product is one that has already seen its better days. --Art Linkletter * The real problem is what to do with the problem solvers after the problems are solved. --Gay Talese * Useless is a wonderful milk yield from a cow that kicks the pail over. --Chisti, quoted by Idries Shah * One does not get over a passion by representing it. Rather, it is over when one is able to represent it. --Nietzsche, WTP * when man determined to destroy / himself he picked the was of shall and finding only why / smashed it into because --e.e. cummings * A thing is complete when you can let it be. --Gita Bellin * Existence really is an imperfect tense that never becomes a present. --Nietzsche * Try as hard as we may for perfection, the net result of our labors is an amazing variety of imperfectness. We are surprised at our own versatility in being able to fail in so many different ways. --Samuel McChord Crothers
436

GUA 64, WEI4 JI4, NOT YET COMPLETE
Binary 010 101 = 21 (1/3); Kan below, Li above
64.X, Overall Image The flame is positioned on top of the water Not yet complete The noble young one, accordingly, is heedful and discerning
so that things remain straightforward
Flame over water is clearly misplaced, completely out of its element. The young fox crossing thin ice, like the albatross over mid-ocean, must keep his longer-term goals on his mind, attending to details, with sharp eyes for problems and needs, digressing only to further the purpose of crossing. To see the big picture here includes lots of irrelevant things. Seeing only what matters the most requires a distorted perspective. The wise take great care with distinctions, so that each thing finds its right place and footing stays sure. A useful tension exists here between what could be and what is, an energy potential. Things out of their proper places draw themselves homeward.
64.0, Not Yet Complete Fulfillment The little fox is almost across the half-frozen stream To soak that tail Is not a direction with merit
Nearly halfway across the half-frozen stream, the wary, young fox is dauntless, but careful. He is also not done growing older and wiser, and knows this. He continues to follow his plan. His plan, however, has already crossed, and now relaxes on that far shore in the sun. Such a plan can drown itself many times over, yet come back as lively as ever. The tangible fox is unable to do this and so he wants to keep all of his trouble in theory, and to keep his loose ends together. This far from safety, with just as far forward as back, he cannot afford even to dampen his tail. His nearest home or resting place may be all the way at the end. Nothing is granted but givens, as he can find and claim them. The sequences are uncertain, the problems are unknown. And yet he wants certain, not probable, outcomes. Thankfully, only three out of four feet really need to be sure. Thinking on and with his feet, he tests the ice before he commits his weight, keeping three points on the known and one for new knowledge. Almost all of this tension and stress increases his chance of success. Thoughts of ice cold water, thoughts of the warm, sunny shore: a tension pulls one to the other.
437

64.M, Key Words Suspense, state of transition, unfinished business, halfway across, states of change Uncertainty; sustaining purpose and effort, second wind, subordination to the goal Tension between what is and what must be, elasticity, necessity as a motivation Dynamic disequilibrium, the energy of displacement, provisional ends and means Actualizing potential energy; midcourse maneuvers; use of stress and momentum Vigilance, making accidents serve ends; using uncertainty & insecurity as sources
64.G, From the Glossary wei4 (to be, is, are, has, have) not yet, less than, still not, yet to (be), as yet (no, not, nothing), short/shy of, still (have) (no, not, short of); not now, now not, (even) before, prior to, without, lacking, incomplete; not (yet) ready (to); never (a), will never be; do/did/has/have not; (to) lack, come up/fall short (in, with, of); still not be, remain less than (s, ed, ing); if not yet; negation; no ... yet, has no ... yet, not ... yet, has not ... yet; still / as yet un-; in-, un-; incompletely ji4 (to be) complete, across, done, finished, accomplished, numerous; stately, dignified, beautiful, up to standard; of help, assistance; across (a, the) stream, river; (to) complete, conclude, succeed, finish, fulfill, perfect, achieve, increase, accomplish, stop, cease, ford, cross; (a, the) river, stream; benefit, assist, aid, contribute to, help, relieve, save, overcome an obstacle (s, ed, ing); (a, the) accomplishment, completion, obstacle overcome
64.T, Tuan Zhuan (To be) not yet complete (means) fulfillment
The flexible occupies the center The little fox (is) almost across the (half-frozen) stream:
(But) not yet beyond the middle To soak that tail
Is not a direction with merit: Wanting to go on to the end Even though less than suitably placed The firm (and) the flexible (all) correspond
438

64.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.1: don't pursue the missing horse, just avoid error)
Soaking one's tail Embarrassing
64.1x Soaking one's tail: Such an extreme indiscretion The young fox struts out onto thin ice, as if the equal to his plan, like the last word in high stepping. But then he steps down too hard on the low-probability outcome. First hand experience comes rushing home, chilling his hot young head, clear from the tip of his tail. Here's a quick lesson in ends and means, a refreshing chance to learn how to swim, something to groan about later, and reasons to insure his future concern with success. Now he can truly imagine how crossing streams lengthwise is bad. This is no great misfortune: he has only just left the near shore. Although starting over means time for his tail to dry, it is also good time to process these new revelations and become a little bit older. This is a fortunate message, sent straight to his self-esteem. His mental life is drawn back now to practical ends and details.
64.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.2: no worry, accept present constraints as a blessing)
Braking those wheels Persistence is promising
64.2x Nine second's persistence (is) promising: In balance in order to advance correctly He remains a long way from home, but he takes a restful moment here on the shore to study what he's come to, adjust directions and bearings, and begin this next ford correctly. He begins to test his brakes early in the crossing, keeping them dry and riding them into the water, holding his horses a little, trading off a little much-needed momentum for surer feelings of safety. There's more to a journey than going forth quickly. There is more to the chariot at his command than light weight and powerful horses. The chariot will need to stop precisely as often as it starts forward, just like walking in mountains means that climb and descent have identical measures. Power and restraint aren't two separate things, but both will be the components of success. Without momenum he'll get stuck in mid-sream, without his brakes he'll go too far.
439

64.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.3: cauldron's ears altered, its function is impaired)
If not yet across, to go boldly has pitfalls It is worthwhile to cross the great stream
64.3x (If) not yet across, to go boldly has pitfalls: The position is not appropriate He makes some remarkable progress as he hurries towards home and completion. But as soon as he reaches the crossing, things begin to go sideways. It would seem that the ferryman is not in as much of a hurry, and he likes to tease those who are. First reactions have made bad first impressions. The ferryman now does not like our traveler's attitude, and flatly refuses to take him across. It is tempting here to make the ferryman ford the stream lengthways, but this will not contribute to progress, or to getting across: there are laws against such things. Our homeward bound traveler might as well take his anger aside, along with his axe and some rope, and then build himself a small raft. Frustration is impractical, so he gets a grip and handles things better. Good ideas are the ones which work. Once across he can send gestures back.
64.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience
(Fan Yao 04.4: afflicted by ignorance, a shame)
Persistence is promising while regrets pass Force was spent to subjugate the barbarian country Though three years brought rewards of great domains
64.4x Persistence (is) promising (while) regrets pass: The objectives (are) carried out Not yet done with the forces of wrong, he steels his heart and wades into hell. What does he get himself into? Three long years of battle against the Gui Fang. He will turn himself into a weapon of war, so that any kindness will look like a tactic, any mistake like a ploy. To advance means to put things aside and behind him, including all thoughts of his home life. Three years of resolve will wrest order from the chaos, although every day new lands will be claimed. His final reward is the conquest, and the fitness this brings, and maybe even some lessons to spread about fighting, both with and against more competent warriors. But his final demon to conquer will be this foreign state of mind, no more native to him than the northern barbarians are to his homeland. Neither completion nor peace are found by the end of this battle.
440

64.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao 06.5: the contest is most promising)
Persistence is promising Despite the regrets The noble young one moves toward the light of example Holding true Promising
64.5x The noble young one moves toward the light of example: The brightness (is) promising Times of transition can feel quite foreign or strange, as when the fire run wild has cleared the ground for new growth. This will not seem like much of a garden now. The thorns are the first to take over, to hold their ground for the weeds next to come. The careless get stuck and blood is shed. But the weeds taking root are as green as the plants of tomorrow. The time now begins to bear witness, the change foreseen starts to come into view, at least to those with more than one single season of vision. The wise one might seem self-absorbed, with eyes that look too far beyond, or too closely, as if picking the present apart. But that helpful light up ahead will be his. We are but bridges for those who come after. And many have come before us, and charted some of the ways changes go. Their examples serve as provisional truths.
64.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.6: the duke takes aim at raptor high on battlement)
Being confident on top of drinking wine Not wrong But to soak one's own head, Even with truth, is truly to lose it
64.6x Drinking wine (and) soaking the head: Truly without comprehending the limits The long transition is practically over and the vigilant want to relax. They are merely nearing completion, but already the big celebration begins. The heady wine is passed freely about in the tavern, in a confident celebration. There is no blame at all in all of this making merry, but a poor follow-through here can reach backward through time and mess up a good beginning. The old fox first gets his whole tail across, before he and his plan for success will share stories. As the arrow takes flight, the bow is still held steady, the means are held to the end, the trust invested is kept. There is a great difference between letting go and falling apart. One might need to veer pretty badly off course to change outcomes now, but this kind of thing might be able to do that. One wants a grander finale. To dump the wine on his own head is not an apotheosis.
441

64, Dimensions pang tong gua (opposite): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete qian gua (inverse): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete jiao gua (reverse): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete hu gua (nuclear): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 39, 53, 63, 37 shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family 64, Wai Guang * Qabalah: Yesod in Atziluth * Tarot: Nine of Wands * Astrology: Luna in Fire 64, Quotations * To keep every cog and wheel is the first precaution of intelligent tinkering. --Aldo Leopold, A Sand County Almanac * Man has been reared by his errors: 1) he saw himself always imperfect, 2) he gave himself imaginary qualities, 3) he felt himself in a false position to the animals and nature, and 4) he always devised new tables of values, and accepted them for a time as eternal and unconditioned. --Nietzsche, Joyful Wisdom * Live dangerously. --ibid. * The report of my death was an exaggeration. --Mark Twain * We cannot remain consistent with the world save by growing inconsistent with our past selves. --Havelock Ellis * Strong hope is a much greater stimulant of life than any realized joy could be. --Friedrich Nietzche
442

